CHAPTER XI.

FRIENDS IN DISTRESS.


Half an hour later the boys stopped beside a ruined wall in which was a still more ruined gate.

It was the home of Gen. Luiz Blanco, whose wife and child it was that the boys had saved from the mountain lion.

Above the house, on a lofty turret, waved the American flag--a fact which caused the boys to enter the gate and approach the house without hesitation.

But when they reached the great front door leading into the patio, they found it shut and barred.

Here they knocked loudly.

For some minutes there was no reply, despite repeated knocks, but finally a voice called out in English:

"Who's there?"

"American boys in trouble."

"What?" was the surprised reply. "Say it again, till I see if it is true."

"It's true all right, all right," said Billie. "If you don't believe it we'll sing the 'Star Spangled Banner,' or 'Hail Columbia'."

They could hear some one removing the bars and a moment later the gate swung open, and a huge, bewhiskered man in ragged garments and a Winchester rifle in his hand stood before them.

"Come in quick," he commanded, "and let's get this gate barred. There is no knowing when that band of robbers will be back."

"Robbers?" queried Billie, as he set the little girl on the ground and extended his hand to the man. "What robbers?"

"They call themselves soldiers," and the man seized Billie's hand and gave it a mighty grip, which made even Broncho Billie wince, "but what do we care for them? With four Americans we can defy a hundred of them." Then, as Donald and Adrian finished barring the gate: "It's certainly good for sore eyes to see such faces," and he grasped each boy in turn.

"Well, we're mighty glad to see you," replied Donald. "We expected to find the place deserted."

"How did you know anything about the place?"

"This lady told us it is her home."

"What?" from the man. "Do you mean to tell me this is the Señora Blanco?"

"Even so, Señor," replied the lady. "No one would recognize me in these rags and grief. Oh, Señor, had it not been for these brave Americans I should have been devoured by a lion."

"You don't tell me. But I'd know they were the real thing. Their faces show it. But come, let's go into the house. You'll excuse me, Señora, for taking possession of your castle."

"It is yours, Señor. Do with it as you will. But will you not do me the favor of your name?"

"I beg your pardon, Señora. I had forgotten. I am Ebenezer Black, who owns the ranch across the valley. My daughter and I were out on a hunt for some lost cattle when we were waylaid by this so-called company of soldiers. I drove them off but my daughter was wounded and I made for this place. Finding no one at home, I took possession."

"I am so glad, Señor. And where is your daughter now?"

"Sitting in a big armchair, nursing a wounded arm."

"Oh, let us hasten," cried the señora. "I may be of some assistance."

They hurried into the house and into the great library, now all in disorder and strewn with bits of cigars and cigarettes. In one of the big leather chairs sat a girl of some sixteen or seventeen, with her left arm in a sling, but in her right hand she held a glistening revolver. She was very slight, but dressed in a riding costume of unique design, and with a wealth of soft brown hair hanging just to her collar. With just a touch of pallor due to the wound, the boys thought her the most beautiful girl they had ever seen, not excepting Pedro's sister Guadalupe.

That the girl was surprised at the addition to the party goes without saying. She looked first at her father, then at the newcomers and then back to her father, as much as to ask: "Who are they?"

"This," said Mr. Black as the señora came forward, "is the lady of the house and her daughter. These are American boys, as you can see, although you haven't had a chance to know many American boys. I don't know their names, but names don't count. I'll vouch for them."

"We are very highly complimented," laughed Donald, "but I shall be pleased to introduce us. I am Donald Mackay. Now that you know me, I will introduce my friends, Adrian Sherwood, ranch owner and good fellow, and William Stonewall Jackson Winkle, better known as 'Broncho Billie.' We are known as the Broncho Rider Boys."

"Oh, Father," exclaimed the girl, "I've read about them. I have a book some one sent me from the United States telling about their adventures at the Keystone ranch."

"You don't say so," from her father. "I didn't know they were such celebrities. Such being the case, young gentlemen, allow me to introduce my daughter, Josephine, commonly called Josie. Now then, how did you all come here?"

As briefly as possible Adrian related their adventures since they left the City of Mexico the previous morning; told about the information contained in the telegram from Gen. Maas, and wound up by saying: "We may be at war with Mexico right now for all we know."

"Well, now what do you think of that?" exclaimed Mr. Black. "I just knew I had a reason when I hoisted that flag. It's one Josie always carries in her saddle bags. It makes her feel safer, she says."

"And I hope she is safer," exclaimed Billie, "with it waving over her to-day, than she would be without it."

"At any rate she has more protection than she had a few hours ago," ventured the señora. "I shall never forget how I was protected."

"I'd feel a whole lot better," said Donald, "if I had some other weapon. A Colt does very well in a tight place; but I certainly miss my Marlin."

"We formerly had quite a supply of arms," was the explanation offered by the señora, "but when Gen. Blanco went to join Gen. Carranza he armed all his men and it took about everything we had. However, there are a few weapons left--unless," she added as an afterthought, "the Huerta soldiers have discovered their hiding place."

She led the way to the cellar and pointed to a spot at one side.

"If you will brush away the dirt that covers the floor about there," she said, "you will find a large slab. This can be raised, and underneath there should still be several good rifles."

Donald and Billie, who had accompanied her, while Adrian remained up stairs with the others, quickly followed her instructions. The edges of the slab were exposed to view and after some effort the opening was revealed. In it were four rifles and an old-fashioned cannon. The rifles were not of the latest make, but two were magazine rifles and were a decided improvement over revolvers in case it came to defending the house.

"I suppose that old cannon might be mounted on the roof somehow and made effective," said Donald after he and Billie had inspected the other arms. Then to the señora: "Is there any ammunition?"

"There was powder in that wine cask," she replied, "but I don't know whether there is any left. The balls for the cannon are on the roof."

The boys examined the cask and found it contained quite a quantity of powder. Then they all returned to the library and made their report.

"Not a very heavy armament to withstand a siege, is it?" was Mr. Black's comment. "Half a dozen rifles with about a hundred cartridges, an old cannon that might explode any minute, and four revolvers. It won't do."

"What else can we do?" asked Billie.

"Why, now that there are four of us, we'll cross the valley to my house. It is just as well located to withstand a siege as this and it is thoroughly armed and provisioned."

"Suppose we have to fight?"

"Then we'll fight."

"But you forget your daughter and the señora and her child."

"I didn't forget Josie," was the reply, "and, wounded as she is, she can take care of herself; but I don't know about the others. They would be a handicap. Have you anything better to offer?"

Billie scratched his head.

"Not for the moment."

"Well, I have," exclaimed Adrian.

"I thought it was about time Ad woke up," laughed Donald. "Let's have it."

"Captain Lopez told us that there was a large body of Carranza's troops down the railroad a short distance. If he meant by a short distance six or eight miles they can not be more than a couple of miles from where we now are. I feel sure that the skirmish we passed through has proved disastrous to the Huerta forces and I am willing to go out and find Captain Lopez and bring relief."

"And I'll go with you," said Billie.

"I can do just as well alone. If I am not captured by the other side I shall make it easily, and," he added, "I am sure I shall not be captured, for I can lick any squad of peons that I'm likely to meet."

"You are a brave boy," said Josie, a bit of praise which brought the color to Adrian's cheeks and was an added incentive for bravery.

"But why shouldn't I go?" insisted Billie.

"You may be needed here. This house is a marked place and if a small band of the Huerta forces has escaped, this will be one of the places where they will rally."

"Your friend is right," agreed Mr. Black. "I admire the pluck of all of you, but his plan is best. The sooner he goes the better and we will make the house as impregnable as we can. Let us hope he is successful."

"You can bet on me," was Adrian's reply as he shouldered his rifle, looked to the fastening of his belt, and descended to the gate, where Mr. Black let him out.

After Adrian had gone the others inspected the house and its approaches for the purpose of determining where they might mount the cannon. They finally decided upon a spot in an angle of the roof, where a chimney offered some protection and from which it commanded the main approach to the house.

"I'm not sure we will be able to get the cannon up there," laughed Billie as they passed through the library on their way to the cellar, "but we'll do the best we can."

"Don't worry," was Josie's reply. "You don't know how strong Dad is."

The boys thought they could guess, but when they saw Mr. Black pick up the cannon as though it had been a log of cord wood and carry it upstairs they concluded that Josie was right.

"When I was a young man," was Mr. Black's only comment, "I was considered the strongest man in our county. I reckon if it came to a pinch I'd be a pretty hard man to handle even yet."

The boys had no doubt of it.

By the time the cannon was mounted and loaded the sun was nearing the top of the mountains behind them and a few minutes later it sank from sight.

"It won't be long now until we shall have to depend upon our ears instead of our eyes for our protection," said Donald. "Where is the best place to watch?"

"I'll tell you what I think," said Billie. "Let one watch from the roof and the other down by the gate. The one on the roof can hear noises from a distance. The one by the gate can hear any one who may be sneaking around."

"I'll watch on the roof," said the señora. "I know the chirp of every bird that belongs here. I shall know in a minute if anything happens that is unusual."

"And I'll watch by the gate," declared Donald.

"Only till midnight," said Billie, "when I'll relieve you."

"And I'll relieve the señora," said Josie.

"Where do I come in?" queried Mr. Black.

"You are the general, Dad. You can be everywhere."

Sentry duty is always nerve-racking business. If you have ever been obliged to sit alone in the dark and watch with your ears, you will understand this and you will understand how Donald felt sitting alone by the barred gate in the dark, 3,000 miles from home and in the midst of a war-stricken country.

Even the north star looked unfamiliar, so close was it to the northern horizon. Once in a while he fancied he could hear the señora weeping, but for at least three hours this was all he heard.

Then he heard a distinct "S-s-s-s," which was the signal agreed upon between him and the señora if she heard anything unusual.

In an instant he was on the alert. Yes, he was sure he heard footsteps near the gate, without. Then there were some minutes of silence, then the hiss of a fuse and a moment later an explosion which blew the gate from its hinges.