CHAPTER XII.

A NIGHT ATTACK.


Realizing in an instant that the hiss of the fuse, like the rattle of the snake, betokened danger, Donald drew hastily back into the patio in time to be out of reach of the explosion which splintered the gate and tore it from its hinges.

Then, with finger on trigger, he awaited the coming of the foe.

It was a tense moment and the boy's heart beat fast. He had been in many trying situations, but never in one where the safety of so many others seemed to depend upon him.

He heard the sound of oncoming feet and intuitively threw himself upon the ground behind a little stone paling which surrounded a dismantled fountain.

The act undoubtedly saved his life, for an instant later there was a scattering volley and he could hear the bullets hit against the stone wall of the house behind him.

In an instant he pressed the trigger and a yell which followed gave evidence that the bullet found a mark.

He fired again, but evidently without effect, and a minute later a light at one side of the patio told him that the enemy, or a part of them at least, were inside the gate.

As the light flared up Donald fired again, but again without avail; but a moment later the cannon on the roof spoke.

"So," he thought, "Billie and Mr. Black are at last awake."

At the report of the cannon the light went out and there was the rush of scurrying feet, followed by a shout.

The shout indicated that those within the patio had withdrawn to the other side of the gate.

Feeling sure that the patio was now free of the enemy for a time at least, Donald retreated in the dark to the house and was soon inside. At the first landing he encountered Josie, sitting on a step with a ready revolver. He was able to see her by the dim light of an oil lamp which hung from the ceiling.

"Where are the others?" he asked.

"On the roof. They are trying to locate the enemy."

Donald ascended to the roof.

"I have a plan," he said, "which will enable us to get in another shot. Load with shrapnel and I will see if I can't make some sort of a light outside the gate. Be ready on the instant."

He ran downstairs and again crept out into the dark patio. He had noticed in the afternoon that there were several bundles of straw in the stable.

Taking one of these under his arm, he approached the angle in the wall near the outer gate. He lighted a match and as the flame caught the straw he flung the bundle over the wall, at the same time darting inside the stable.

He had hardly found a safe position when the cannon spoke again and evidently with telling effect.

But before those inside the walls had time to think, the enemy rushed in, determined to capture the place.

In the dark they rushed to the house, but once under the gallery which extended all around the inside of the patio, they produced a light which enabled them to find the doors.

The light also enabled Donald to see those at the door and he fired from the stable.

For a moment the fire in the rear disconcerted the enemy and several fled, but others took possession of the doorway and forced their way in.

The first one who entered fell by a bullet from Josie's revolver; but realizing her weakness she jumped and fled to the floor above, where she met her father coming down.

"They have gained possession of the house," Mr. Black told Billie as he and the señora also descended from the roof. "We must now guard the stairway. We should be able to hold it indefinitely."

This prediction seemed correct, as the first four or five men who attempted to reach the second story never got more than their heads above the floor.

After several trials of this sort, they withdrew and held a council of war. The result was that a few minutes later a voice called out from below:

"If you will surrender, your lives will be spared."

In reply Mr. Black shouted: "If you do not withdraw and leave us in peace you will meet a fearful punishment."

His reply was greeted with jeers.

"I wonder how many of them there are?" queried Billie.

"Quite a bunch from the sound." Then, a moment later, "They seem to be going out."

"Maybe they think we will come down," said Josie.

"But we must not," exclaimed the señora. "They would kill us. Surely our friend must bring us aid soon."

"Let us hope so," was Mr. Black's reply.

And hope was the best they could do.

There was no further attack, although they could hear the sound of voices in the patio below.

After a long period of quiet Mr. Black ventured the assertion that they were waiting for daylight, and his surmise proved correct.

No attempt was made to force an entrance until the first faint light of day began to appear. Then there was renewed activity below and a few minutes later the sound of a single shot.

"I wonder what that was," exclaimed Billie.

No one could answer, but had Billie been where he could see, he would have known that it was Donald who fired.

As the light came, Donald, peering through a crack in the stable, had seen a man climbing up the side of the house toward the roof. Without a moment's hesitation he fired and the man dropped, shot through the right hand.

But the shot was Donald's undoing. The flash of his gun was detected and half a dozen men rushed his hiding place and took him prisoner.

He was at once taken before the captain of the band and questioned as to the number of defenders and as to the whereabouts of Gen. Blanco.

To all the questions Donald gave an evasive answer.

"If you will tell me where Gen. Blanco is," said the captain, "I will give you your freedom."

"That's easy," was Donald's reply. "He is with Gen. Carranza."

"I don't believe it."

"Well, I can't help that, nor does what you believe make any difference. It is the truth and what you may believe has nothing whatever to do with it."

The captain scowled.

"Who is it then, that is defending the house?"

"Americans. You had better let us go, or it will be the worse for you. We had a safe conduct from Gen. Huerta, but we were betrayed."

"If I had my way," said the captain, "I'd shoot every American in the whole of Mexico."

"I don't see why," from Donald. "We have nothing against you."

"Take him away," ordered the captain, "and see that he does not escape. Now let us capture the others."

There was a rush for the house as Donald was led back to the stable.

Billie and Mr. Black heard them coming.

"Go to the roof," commanded Mr. Black, speaking to the two females, "and keep yourselves and the little girl out of sight. We will hold them back here as long as we can and then we will also come to the roof."

The command had hardly been obeyed than the Mexicans began to crowd up the stairs. They were met with shot after shot, but at last all the weapons were empty.

"Run for the roof," said Mr. Black as he arose to his feet and with his heavy boot kicked a head which was just coming up the stairs.

Billie obeyed and a minute later the fugitives had gathered upon the last place of safety left.

"If we only had some ammunition," moaned Billie. "Can't we do something?"

Then, as in answer to his own query, he picked up a twelve-pound cannon ball that lay on the roof and, raising it above his head with both hands, hurled it through the opening upon those below.

This unexpected attack caused the besiegers to draw back, but only for a moment. Then they came on again. In his desperation, Mr. Black, with almost superhuman strength, picked up the cannon itself, just as Billie had picked up the ball, and hurled it down the stairs.

Half a dozen men fell beneath its weight, while the others, frightened at such an exhibition of strength, fell back in dismay.

A shout from the captain urged them forward, but ere they could gather their courage for another rush there came the sound of a volley in the patio below and a minute later Adrian rushed up the stairs, followed by Captain Lopez and a squad of his soldiers.

Taken in the rear and entirely by surprise, the Huerta forces threw down their arms and cried for mercy, and in less than five minutes after the arrival of Captain Lopez and his men, the entire force, or as many as remained, were prisoners.