CHAPTER XV.

THE INSULT AVENGED.


Perceiving that the advantage was on their side, the boys did not hesitate to profit by it.

"Do as we bid," ordered Donald sternly, "and your lives will be saved. Disobey and we will not answer for the consequences."

The kneeling peons uttered never a word, but raised their eyes with a look of surprise.

"Get up," was the next command.

The peons obeyed.

"Now conduct us to the water front by a route where there are no Mexican soldiers."

"Do you think you can trust them?" asked Billie.

"At any sign of treachery, our first shot will be for them." Then to the peons: "Now march."

Without a word the peons, five in number, started back over the route by which they had come but a minute before.

"Where did the other American come from?" asked Billie of the peon nearest him as they rode along.

"Quien sabe, señor," was the hesitating response. "We saw him riding by and we followed him."

"That's the way with loud talkers," remarked Adrian. "When the test comes they usually weaken."

The firing, which had somewhat subsided for a few minutes, suddenly began again with renewed vigor, especially on the part of the ships.

"Our boys are getting ready for another advance," said Billie, and his manner became greatly excited. "Let's get there in time to take part."

"I'm willing," declared Adrian. "Come on!"

The two boys dug their spurs into their horses and dashed forward, upsetting a couple of the peons in their flight.

"Hold on!" called out Donald. "You'll get into trouble."

Billie and Adrian paid no attention to his cry, whereupon he also put spurs to his horse, leaving the peons gaping with astonishment in the middle of the road.

And now the boys came into sight of the water front where the fighting was going on. It was at the instant that the order had been given to clear the space around the custom house, and the boys saw the marines advance on the double quick.

The Mexicans gave way, but volley after volley was poured down upon the advancing Americans from the roofs of houses and from nearby church towers.

There were several shots in rapid succession from the _Chester_, which had drawn in more closely, every one of which struck a tower where a large force of Mexicans had gathered.

The tower toppled and fell, carrying many with it.

"Hurrah!" cried Billie. "Give it to them!" and, firing his rifle as he went, he rode right down into the main street.

"He'll be killed by our own men!" cried Donald.

But he was not. Instead he dashed into the open space in front of the custom house, just as the marines swept by, his hat off and his rifle cracking as fast as he could fire.

Seeing that the danger from the marines was past, Donald and Adrian fell in behind Billie, just as an officer came around the corner at the head of another company.

Espying the boys, he halted his command.

"What are you doing here?" he demanded.

"We just came to town," replied Billie, "and we're trying to help avenge the insult to the flag."

"Good!" was the emphatic reply. "Fall in behind us. You may be of service."

The boys obeyed and followed the company as it swept up the street. Presently they came to a barricade, behind which the marines had taken a stand. The boys expected the command to halt, but instead they passed the barricade and pushed onward toward the outskirts of the city.

All the time there was a continuous fire upon them by men secreted on the roofs of houses.

"I'd clean out those snipers if I were in command," said Donald to his companions.

The words were hardly out of his mouth ere another company of marines made its appearance and the men dashed into the houses on either side of the street.

"Somebody has the same idea, Don," was Billie's comment as they rode along.

Two blocks farther came the order to halt and entrench. A minute later the officer called the boys toward him.

"Would you rather lend us your horses, or act as orderlies?" he asked.

"If it's all the same to you," was the reply, "we'll serve as orderlies."

"Very well. Will you," turning to Adrian, "go back to the custom house and tell Captain Rush that we have reached our position. You," to Billie, "ride with all speed to the landing and say that the enemy has retreated toward the water works. They should not be allowed to stop long enough to do any damage."

The two boys were off like the wind to carry the orders.

"Anything for me?" asked Donald.

"Not for the present. Better dismount and get behind something."

Two minutes later Adrian pulled up in front of the Custom House and delivered his message, while Billie kept on to the water's edge.

"Do you know where the water works are?" asked the officer to whom Billie gave his order.

"Yes, sir!"

"Then lead us to it."

Without a word Billie obeyed and the Jackies followed on the run.

The information was evidently received none too soon, for they encountered quite a force of Mexicans, guarding the works.

A volley from the bluejackets was returned by a scattering fire and the Mexicans turned and fled.

But the volley had been sufficient to lose Billie his mount, as his horse came to his knees with a bullet in his shoulder.

Without waiting to see the cause of Billie's fall any more than to ask if he was hit, the Jackies pushed on toward the water works, leaving Billie to look out for himself as best he could until the work in hand was completed.

"This is sure enough tough luck," was Billie's comment as he helped the horse to his feet and examined the wound. "It will lay him up for a week."

He took the horse by the bridle and led him slowly back toward the Custom House, where he reported to an officer and hunted up Adrian.

"What had we better do now?" he asked. "I'd like to find a place to tend to my horse."

"The fighting seems about over," was Adrian's reply, "and I reckon the horse will be given attention by some one."

"Oh, I don't want to make any trouble, Ad! If nobody objects, suppose we go hunt a stable."

They were about to leave when a sergeant stopped them.

"You're to follow me to the Captain," he said. "Here," to a marine who stood by, "take charge of these horses and see that the lame one is cared for."

"I wonder if they will take our horses away from us?" muttered Adrian as they followed the sergeant.

"Give it up. I wonder what he wants of us?"

It did not take them long to find out.

"Are you the boys that brought the messages from Lieutenant Blunt?" asked Captain Rush.

"Yes, sir."

"Will you undertake another mission?"

"With pleasure," replied Adrian.

"Same here, sir," from Billie, "but my horse has been wounded."

"That's bad. However, I guess we can find another."

"Sure, sir. I can borrow Don's."

"Who is Don?"

"He's the other one of us, sir. He is still out with Lieutenant Blunt."

"Well," said the Captain, "either two of you will do. What I want is to find out to just what point the Mexican army is falling back. Do you think you can find out?"

"Sure."

"Very well. My compliments to Lieutenant Blunt and give him this order. He will pass two of you through the lines. The other can remain with him. Sergeant, their horses."

Five minutes later, both astride Adrian's horse and leading the other, they appeared at the outpost and delivered the order.

"Which two shall it be?" laughed the lieutenant as he looked the boys over.

"I guess it will have to be Adrian and Don," replied Billie ruefully. "I've had glory enough for one day. The insult to the flag has been avenged and the Stars and Stripes are floating over Vera Cruz."

"I think it's only fair that Don, as you call him, should share in the adventure," said the lieutenant, "and the sooner you go the better. It is almost sundown now."

Then as Donald and Adrian started on their mission:

"Success to you and report here when you return."

"Is there any place near here where I can care for my horse?" asked Billie as soon as the others had passed out of sight.

"Why, yes. There are stables in almost any of these houses. Here, try this one," and the lieutenant indicated the one before which they were standing.

Billie knocked on the big door, but there was no reply.

"Knock louder," laughed the lieutenant. "Use your boot."

Billie used his foot and with such vigor that the gate flew open.

When no one appeared to answer his summons, he stuck his head inside the patio and called lustily.

"Must be deserted," he finally remarked. "Such being the case, lieutenant, I reckon I might as well take possession."

"Sure. Go ahead. If every one has gone, I may join you later."

Billie led his horse within and looked around. It was a large house and the patio was the most elaborate Billie had ever seen. He had thought that Pedro's home in Mexico City was fine, but this was much finer.

"They must be swells," was the lad's comment. "I reckon they became frightened and have run away with General Maas."

He started to lead the horse to the stable and then stopped.

"I might as well shut this big gate," he thought. "I'll leave the little gate open so the lieutenant can come in."

He pushed the big gate together and dropped the bolt in its place.

"Now to do something for the horse," and he turned to the animal which stood patiently by.

Then he stopped and stood in mute astonishment at what his eyes beheld.

In the center of the patio, with rifle in hand, aimed squarely at his head, stood a figure he had last seen on the banks of the Rio Grande more than a year before--the figure of a man whom he had known only as Santiago.

The recognition was mutual, but instead of the friendliness which had always before marked the attitude of the strange man, there was now upon his face a look of the most bitter hatred.