CHAPTER XVI.

SHADOWING AN ARMY.


When Donald and Adrian left the city they rode slowly along for some distance without any sign of the retreating Mexicans, except the occasional sight of some camp utensil which had been thrown aside as too heavy to carry. Occasionally they met peons or women, who looked at them curiously, but all of whom were more than willing to tell of the army that had so recently passed.

"How many men do you suppose General Maas has?" queried Adrian.

"The lieutenant said it was supposed he had about seven thousand. It may be more, and it may be less."

"Well, they're certainly light-footed," laughed Adrian. "Don't you think we ought to get closer?"

"If we can without being seen."

They put spurs to their horses and for a mile or more galloped along at a fair speed.

Then from a little eminence they saw the rear guard of the retreating army.

"This is near enough," cautioned Donald.

They halted and watched the marching men.

"How far would you say we are from town, Don?"

"At least seven or eight miles."

"Do you know what towns are in this direction?"

"Not the slightest idea. That's the next thing we must find out."

The enemy having by this time passed out of sight, they again spurred forward, but holding their distance.

Darkness had now fallen and the boys were obliged to pick their way more carefully.

For half an hour they rode silently and then Donald spoke:

"They certainly will not march all night. They must have some place in mind."

"So I think," from Adrian. "But there seems no sign of a halt."

Ten minutes later, however, they caught sight of a fire light.

"That looks like it might be a camp," suggested Adrian.

They rode cautiously forward.

"It surely is," affirmed Donald a couple of minutes later. "We'd better dismount and do a little reconnoitering on foot."

The suggestion was immediately put into effect.

Leaving their horses tethered beneath a giant palm, which would serve as a landmark, the boys crept stealthily forward. In a few minutes they were near enough to see figures about the fire.

"They are evidently getting ready to pass the night," said Donald.

"Yes," from Adrian, "and there is another fire off yonder," and he pointed to the right.

"They are getting ready to post their pickets," explained Donald.

"Then we'd better get busy, Don. There must be some way of finding out where the army is going to stop."

As with one accord they drew still nearer the camp, they could smell the coffee and their appetites began to assert themselves.

"Wish I had some," whispered Adrian.

"You'll get to be as bad as Billie first thing you know," was the retort. "But, hush! There comes some one."

They lay flat on the ground and listened.

Whoever it might be was coming directly toward them.

Not a move did the boys make, hoping that they might not be discovered, but ready to act if they were.

When within ten feet of them the footsteps halted and they heard a voice say:

"This will be far enough. You are the end man on the line."

"Bueno, caporal!"

"Keep a close watch," cautioned the corporal. "You never know what these Americans may do."

"Si, Señor. How far are we from Vera Cruz?"

"About four leagues" (twelve miles). "General Maas will make a stand at Tejeria, about a league further on."

Then as he moved away. "Remember now, no sleeping. This is a real war."

"Bueno, mi caporal. I understand."

The corporal departed and the sentry, shouldering his rifle, began pacing his station.

A minute later Donald gave Adrian a dig with his elbow as a signal, and they slowly crawled away.

"That's the information we are after," whispered Donald when they were out of earshot. "Now to get back to Vera Cruz as quickly as possible."

They rose to their feet and ran swiftly but silently toward the palm tree, where their horses were tethered.

Suddenly Adrian stopped and grabbed Donald by the arm.

"What is it, Ad?" asked Donald.

"Can't you see! There is some one there with the horses."

They both peered through the darkness and Donald quickly perceived that Adrian was right.

Then as by one impulse they drew a few steps nearer.

In the dim starlight they were able to make out the figures of several men.

"Do you think they are soldiers?" whispered Don.

Adrian shook his head.

"Camp followers. Thieves," he whispered.

Donald nodded his head in acquiescence.

The boys lay down upon the ground and put their heads together.

"It wouldn't be any trick at all," whispered Donald, "if it were not for the pickets. But any noise will bring down upon us a couple of hundred men. Maybe more. We have simply got to dispose of that outfit without noise. But how?"

"Bad job," was Adrian's only reply.

"If the horses were only our Wyoming cow ponies, they'd come at our call."

"But they're not," replied Adrian.

For several minutes neither spoke, but lay silently watching the movements of the men about the horses.

"How many can you make out, Ad?"

"Five."

"I don't see but four."

Adrian pointed to the left, about ten or twelve feet, to one who stood alone.

"What's he doing there?"

"Give it up." Then a moment later: "I have it!"

"Well, what is it?"

"He's watching for us to return. That's what they're all waiting for. They think we'll be a great catch."

"That's just it," from Donald. "Let's fool them!"

"Well, first, let's capture the one yonder. We'll show them a Wyoming Indian trick."

Slowly and silently the boys wiggled their way to where the lone robber stood. Then as silently as a ghost Donald arose, while Adrian bent on his knees.

There was a swift movement and Donald's arm was around the Mexican's neck, shutting off his wind, while Adrian pulled his feet from beneath him. In another minute he was bound by his own sash and gagged with a handful of grass.

"That's one!" exclaimed Donald, as he sat upon his prisoner's chest. "Now, how about the others?"

"Not so easy, Don."

"But it has to be done," declared Donald. "Scratch your head."

Adrian did so, but to no avail.

Time was passing and they did not know how long ere something would turn up, when Donald gave Adrian a kick.

"Look! They're getting uneasy."

This was undoubtedly true, as the men were moving about and one of them even had the temerity to light a cigarette.

Then of a sudden Adrian spoke.

"I've got it!" he exclaimed under his breath. "Help drag this chap farther away."

They picked him up bodily and carried him fifteen or twenty feet.

"Now, listen," said Adrian, "both of you. You, Don, sneak as near the horses as you dare. I'll give you just five minutes by my watch. Then I am going to give this man one chance for his life. I am going to take the gag from his mouth and let him give one call for help. If he makes another sound, it will be his last."

"Then what?"

"Those fellows have waited so long that they are tired. They will all rush to where they expect to find him. Then you will rush in and cut the tethers. By the time they find this man I will be with you. Sabe?"

"Good!" from Donald. "I'm off."

In exactly five minutes by his watch Adrian gave the prisoner a rough shake.

"You know what I said?"

The man nodded his head.

"Well, I am now going to take out your gag. If you make more than one cry, or utter more than one word, your own knife will finish you."

He held the knife before the man's eyes. Then with the knife in one hand, Adrian pulled the wad of grass from between the prisoner's teeth.

No sooner had the man drawn one long breath than he let out a yell that might have been heard half a mile and which he was about to repeat with variations, when with a swift movement, Adrian forced the grass back into his mouth and the yell died in a dismal gurgle.

"I ought to use the knife," said Adrian, "but I guess this will do."

With a bound he sprang to his feet and dashed to where Donald was already performing his part of the work.

The plan had worked exactly as Adrian had figured, and in another moment the boys were astride the horses and away toward Vera Cruz.

But one thing they had not taken into consideration. That single yell of their erstwhile prisoner had aroused the Mexican pickets and from half a dozen directions came the sound of rifle shots and then the sound of a bugle calling to arms.

Even while Adrian was running toward the horses, the excitement had begun, and as the boys started on their homeward ride, a volley from the encamped forces sent the bullets whistling by their ears.

"This is no place for us!" cried Donald. "Don't be afraid to use the spur. It is our only chance."

And now as they rode furiously forward, came the sound of firing on their left and some distance ahead.

"What does it mean?" called out Adrian as they rode neck and neck through the darkness.

"Search me, Ad; but our only chance is in our horses," and Donald again plied the spur.

Outlined against the sky at the top of a small knoll, they could see a small body of horsemen.

"Keep away to the right," said Donald. "Keep in the valley and in the shadow," and he drew off the beaten highway, with Adrian close behind.

On the soft earth their horses' hoofs made no sound and in a couple of minutes more they descended into a little valley and the noise of the alarm passed out of hearing.

"It was a mighty close shave," declared Adrian a few minutes later, when they pulled their horses down to a walk to allow them to catch their breath.

"Sure was," from Donald, "but we got the information we went after."

Half an hour later they were challenged by the American pickets, which had been thrown even further forward than where the boys had passed through the lines. They stated their mission and were at once sent under guard to the officer of the day.

"Oh, it's you!" was the lieutenant's salutation as he saw who it was. "Did you get what you went after?"

"Yes, sir," from Donald. "The enemy has halted at Tejeria, fifteen miles away."

"Well done. I'll send an orderly to carry the report to headquarters. You boys are entitled to a rest."

"Where's Billie?" asked Adrian, looking around after the orderly had departed.

"Who?"

"Billie. Our chum."

"Oh, yes," replied the lieutenant. "He's disappeared."

"Disappeared?"

"Yes. He went into this house here," pointing to the building before which he had stationed himself, "and when I went in later to see how he was coming on with his wounded horse, I found the horse standing in the middle of the patio, but your chum had disappeared."

"And then what?" queried Donald.

"Nothing. I made up my mind he had gone after something to put on his horse and I haven't thought much about him since."

"Then it's up to us to find him. Can we go inside?"

"Sure," laughed the lieutenant. "Go as far as you like, only keep inside the lines."

Without more words the boys entered the patio.