CHAPTER XVII.

BILLIE GETS A SURPRISE.


When Billie found himself looking into the muzzle of a rifle in the hands of Santiago, his first impulse was to call out; but the expression on Santiago's face caused him to remain silent.

While the strange man owed his life to the lad, as is related in the story of the "Broncho Rider Boys with the Texas Rangers," there was that in the man's face which told that he was under a severe mental strain, and Billie did not think it wise to presume upon his former friendship.

Therefore, he remained quiet, waiting for Santiago to speak.

If he recognized Billie, he gave no intimation of the fact; but in a harsh voice commanded: "Up with your hands!"

Billie obeyed.

"Turn to the left and march. In there," he continued a moment later as Billie approached an open door in the rear of the patio.

Into the house Billie went--into a large room, but dimly lighted. Santiago followed, closing the door behind him with a kick.

"Why shouldn't I shoot you down like a dog?" asked Santiago as soon as the door was closed.

"I can't see any reason," was the reply, "except that it might cause you a lot of trouble when it was found out. I imagine that Admiral Fletcher is going to be pretty severe upon snipers and others who shoot Americans."

"Bah!" exclaimed Santiago angrily. "I spit upon Americans! Bah!"

"That's all right," Billie agreed, "if it's the way you feel about it."

"Just because you Americans have driven away a few soldiers with the guns of your great fleet, you don't think you can conquer Mexico, do you?"

"I hadn't thought much about it."

"Then it's time you did, as you may never have another chance."

"Well, then," explained Billie, "I'll tell you how it looks to me. You might a great deal better be governed by the United States than by a man like Huerta."

"Huerta! Huerta!" fairly screamed Santiago. "He is not the governor of Mexico."

"No," from Billie. "He calls himself the provisional president. In reality he is a dictator."

"He is a murderer!" shouted the thoroughly excited man.

"Then what are you worrying about? All that the Americans want is to get rid of Huerta. They don't want Mexico. Didn't you know that, Santiago?"

"What? Who calls me Santiago? I am Ixtazhl, Prince of the Aztecs and guardian of the treasures of Montezuma. Who calls me Santiago?"

In his excitement he rested the stock of his rifle upon the floor and bent upon Billie a gaze so fierce as greatly to disconcert him for the moment.

But Billie was not a lad to be easily unnerved and after a moment he replied calmly:

"I call you by the only name I know. It was the one you used on the Rio Grande when you sent me on a mission to Pancho Villa."

"Villa! Villa!" repeated Santiago, as though trying to recall something that had passed from his memory. "Villa! Where have I heard that name before?"

"On the Rio Grande is all I can tell you. Do you remember Don Rafael?"

At mention of the name the expression on Santiago's face changed again, this time to one of fiercest rage.

"Don Rafael!" he cried. "Don Rafael! Now I know you! You are Don Rafael. That is why I should kill you!"

"Great Scott, no, I am not Don Rafael!" shouted Billie as Santiago again raised his rifle and the lad perceived that he had to do with a crazy man. "I'm the boy that saved your life when Don Rafael tried to kill you. Don't you remember?"

Again Santiago lowered his weapon, and again there came upon his face that puzzled expression.

"Tell me, Santiago--I mean Prince Iztazil, or whatever you call it, what are you doing here?"

Santiago eyed him suspiciously, but finally laid his rifle across a table in the center of the room and approached nearer the lad.

"Listen!" he said in a whisper. "I am the guardian of the treasure of Montezuma. It is to be used to free Mexico from the Spaniard. He must be driven out. The land belongs to the Aztec."

"But where is the Aztec?" queried Billie. "I know him not."

"I am he. The peons are my people. The Spaniard--bah! He owns the houses and he owns the lands; but he must be driven out."

"Isn't that what Villa says?"

"Villa? Villa?" again repeated Santiago, and again he lapsed into silence.

For some minutes he remained motionless ere he stepped back, picked up his rifle and started for a door leading to a stairway.

"Come!" he commanded. "I will show you."

"Hadn't we better take care of the horse first?" asked Billie, not at all anxious to be wandering around with an armed lunatic. "He may die."

"What is a horse when the future of Mexico is at stake, my son? Come with me and you shall hear a strange tale."

"I have heard one already," was Billie's mental comment, but realizing by the term son which Santiago had applied to him that he was in no immediate danger and trusting to his wits to finally overcome the strange man should it become necessary, he followed.

At the head of the stairs was another door, which Santiago opened and entered. It was a sort of ante-room, much like the entrance into a lodge room. Around the walls was a motley collection of firearms, swords, spears and smaller weapons.

Stopping in front of one of the racks, Santiago placed his rifle in it, and then from another took a couple of small swords, one of which he handed to Billie.

"This is a bug house sure enough," muttered the boy as he took the sword and examined it curiously. "I wonder what next?"

He had not long to wait, for opening a closet, Santiago took therefrom two beautifully embroidered robes, one of which he threw over his own shoulders and the other of which he put on Billie.

"It doesn't hardly match my hat," laughed Billie.

Without a word, Santiago removed Billie's sombrero and hung it on a peg in the closet, which he closed.

Then he opened another door and led Billie into a large, brilliantly lighted room, hung with the richest tapestries.

"Looks like we had strayed into some Turkish bath house," thought Billie, "but I might as well see the thing through."

"Sit here beside me, my son," Santiago finally said. "You shall become my heir. I will introduce you to the court."

Santiago clapped his hands, as though bidding a servant to attend; but there was no response.

He turned his head from one side to the other as though in amazement and again clapped his hands, this time with vigor.

After a moment's delay, there was a movement behind one of the draperies and presently the curtain was drawn back and a man's face appeared.

"Come hither," commanded Santiago.

The man obeyed.

"Where are the others?" demanded Santiago.

"Oh, señor," cried the man, "the others have hidden themselves in the cellar!"

"Slaves! Cowards!" exclaimed Santiago. "What do they fear?"

"The great guns, señor. We might all be killed."

"You will certainly be killed if you do not mind what I say," was the reply as Santiago drew his sword. "Now summon the court that I may introduce my son."

The man bowed and left the room, and in a few minutes returned accompanied by two more men and several women, all arrayed in fantastic costumes.

All bowed as they entered, and Santiago waved his hand.

"This is my son and heir," he said. "Come and kiss his hand."

They all came forward and kissed Billie's hand, which he held out in order to facilitate the job.

"Now," said Santiago, "we----"

"Now," interrupted Billie, "if it is all the same to you, Prince, we'll have supper. I haven't had a mouthful to eat since daylight. I'm 'most starved to death."

"It is well," agreed Santiago. "It is well that my heir should not die of hunger. Let the table be placed."

The order seemed to meet with general approval, and in the course of half an hour there was spread what would have proved a feast at any time, but which was beyond description to a hungry boy; and the way he waded into the food was a caution.

During all this time Santiago had uttered never a word, nor would he eat but the smallest portion of food--a taste of every dish which he set before his guest.

"My son tells the truth," Santiago finally remarked as Billie pushed back his chair with the single word "Bastante," meaning enough.

"I always try to," was the smiling rejoinder, for Billie was now in the very best humor. Eating was his strong point and he had gone the limit.

"Clear away the feast and then reassemble," was Santiago's next order.

This order was carried into effect, and the servants also must have enjoyed a square meal, for it was more than an hour ere they again assembled, during which time Billie sank back in his chair and slumbered peacefully.

He was finally awakened by a hand laid upon his arm.

"Awake, my son," were the words he heard. "It is now time that I reveal to you the secret of my life. It is now time that I should tell you the secret of the treasure of Montezuma."

"That's right, Prince," said Billie sleepily. "Let her go."

Santiago regarded him interrogatively.

"What said my son?"

"Oh, yes, Prince. I forgot you only understood good English. Let her go, means proceed with the secret."

"Let her go. Let her go," Santiago repeated a couple of times. "Yes," he continued, "I had forgotten about her."

He clapped his hands and the same servant who had first appeared approached his chair.

Santiago gave an order in a language which Billie did not understand, but which he imagined was Indian, and the servant withdrew, only to reappear a few minutes later with a young woman who greatly resembled Santiago and who was also arrayed in a gorgeous costume.

She had evidently not expected to meet a stranger, for she drew back upon seeing Billie and the color rushed to her face.

"Come hither, daughter," was Santiago's command.

The young woman obeyed.

"Lucia," said Santiago, "this is the honorable young man whom I have chosen for my heir. Henceforth consider him your betrothed. The marriage shall take place one new moon from to-day."

"Oh, Father," cried the girl, her face becoming even more scarlet than before, "I cannot----"

"No!" interrupted Billie, springing to his feet, "neither can I. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Santiago----"

"What!" cried Santiago, springing to his feet and again drawing his sword. "Who calls me Santiago? I am Prince Ixtazhl of the great Aztec nation and guardian of the treasure of Montezuma!"

He raised his sword and would have stricken Billie down ere the boy could have prevented had not the young woman thrown herself between them and seized his arm.

At the same instant the door from the ante-room opened and Donald and Adrian entered.