CHAPTER XVIII.

A MISSION FOR FUNSTON.


"Santiago!" exclaimed Donald.

"By all that's great!" from Adrian.

"Help!" cried Lucia. "He will do something desperate!"

Donald and Adrian sprang forward, but their assistance was not needed. Billie had by this time gathered his wits and in a twinkling the mad-man was disarmed.

"Shall we bind him?" asked Adrian as they came forward.

"No, indeed," replied Billie as the now helpless man sank down upon the chair. "He isn't dangerous."

"What's it all about?" queried Donald.

"Oh, nothing much! He simply wanted to make me his heir and marry me to his daughter."

Donald and Adrian cast an admiring gaze upon Lucia, who was now kneeling at her father's side.

"Well," said Adrian in an aside, "I don't see why you should object to that."

"Who said I objected?" demanded Billie. "It is the young woman who objects."

"But whoever supposed he had a daughter?" said Donald.

"Not I," from Billie. "But this is certainly a queer mess."

Then to Lucia: "How long has he been in this way, Señorita?"

"Only a few days. Since this trouble with the Americanos."

"But how could that affect him?"

"It is a long story, señor. For years he has been trying to overthrow the government. When Madero was made president, he was happy. Then came that awful tragedy, by which Madero was killed. Since that time he has not been himself. But when it became evident that the United States would interfere he became as you have seen him to-day."

"When I told him that all the United States wanted was to get rid of Huerta, he was much pleased," explained Billie. "That was when he proposed to make me his heir."

Lucia's cheeks grew red, as she asked: "And did you accept his proposal?"

"I neither accepted nor rejected. I just followed him in to see what would happen next."

"But would you accept?" insisted Lucia.

"That depends," replied Billie, with a touch of color in his own face. "But what had we better do now? You and I will discuss the other question later."

"The best thing we can do," interposed Donald, "is to report to Lieutenant Blunt. Isn't there some place, Señorita, where your father can be placed for safe-keeping?"

"He will be perfectly safe here with me, señors, if the servants are allowed to remain."

"They certainly will be," declared Billie. "I will personally vouch for that. We have done Captain Rush a good turn to-day and I know he will be glad to do that much for us. And besides, the Americans will harm no one."

Lucia gave Billie a grateful look as she replied:

"Ah, señor, I shall trust it all to you. I can see that you are a friend of my father and I know you are telling the truth."

"You bet you can trust me," was Billie's emphatic reply. "Come on, fellows, let's go look after my horse."

In the door Billie turned:

"I'll leave my robe in the cupboard, Señorita; and, if you don't mind, I'll ask Lieutenant Blunt to make himself at home in the patio."

"The house is yours, señor. Do as you think best."

"By George!" exclaimed Adrian as they descended the stairs to the patio, "this is getting serious."

"What?" queried Donald.

"Why this affair of Billie and the young lady we have just left."

"Nonsense!" from Billie. "It isn't half as serious as what I saw at Moreno."

"No!" laughed Donald. "I saw that myself; but Josie is an American. Hey, Ad?"

"I don't think it's very nice to be making remarks about young ladies in their absence," retorted Adrian, bristling up.

"Oh, come now, Adrian!" laughed Billie. "You started it. But what do you make out of Santiago?"

"He's evidently a rich old chap with a bug. That's all."

"Well," commented Billie, with a nod of his head, "strange things do happen when you travel. Who'd have thought we'd ever see the old chap again, and at a time like this?" and he went back to where Adrian and Donald had stabled the horses, to see if there was anything he could do for the wounded animal.

When Lieutenant Blunt was made acquainted with the conditions prevailing in the house, he immediately took possession of the lower floor and from that time on until the arrival of General Funston with the Fifth Brigade, it was made one of the official residences.

The week following the occupation of Vera Cruz by the American forces was a busy one for our boys. Because of their intimate knowledge with the Spanish language, they were continually in demand. There was never a verbal message from the American Admiral to some Mexican official but what they were called upon, and they very soon made friends of every Jackie and marine in the city.

Ten days later the boys stood upon the wharf awaiting the arrival of the first boatload of General Funston's regulars from the big transports which had anchored in the harbor the night before. Because of the shallowness of the water, everything in Vera Cruz harbor has to be brought ashore in small boats, known as lighters. As the boys watched the first of these to approach there was something in the face and bearing of the officer in command which attracted their attention.

"By George!" exclaimed Donald, "I seem to know that face. Don't you, Billie?"

"Does look kind o' familiar. Where have we seen him?"

"I'll tell you!" cried Adrian. "It's the lieutenant who was in charge of the patrol on the Rio Grande."

"Lieutenant Grant!" exclaimed Billie. "Sure as you're born. Well this is luck!"

"Luck? What do you mean?"

"Why, maybe he'll be able to tell me whatever became of those drafts for ten thousand pounds that I took from old Don Pablo."

His companions laughed.

"Still thinking about that, are you?" said Donald. "Why of course you'll never hear of them again. The bank is simply in that much."

"Maybe so," admitted Billie, "but I'll get something official."

And he did.

It was several days later, though, after the regulars had taken possession of the city and the navy forces had withdrawn to their ships. The boys were sitting in Lieutenant Grant's quarters, to whom they had offered their services as soon after his landing as they were able, and were laughing over their adventures on the border.

"It was certainly a close call you boys had," the lieutenant was saying. "I'm not sure but our neutrality was mighty near a breaking point. What do you think, Billie?"

"Possibly so; Americans will be Americans. But say, Lieutenant, whatever was done about those drafts I took from Don Pablo? I've never been called upon to tell my story, nor have they ever come back to me."

"That's because you were out of the United States," replied Lieutenant Grant. "It was less than a month ago that I was asked if I knew your whereabouts. Uncle Sam has decided that he has no claim to the drafts and they were returned to me. I have them in my army chest. If they are any good to you, I shall be pleased to hand them over."

"I guess they are not much use to any one," sighed Billie mournfully. "My father says no bank would cash them without Don Pablo's signature, and no one can get that."

"I'm glad you take it so philosophically," laughed the lieutenant. "I hope you'll have better luck next time."

The boys arose to leave.

"Which way?" asked the lieutenant.

"No place in particular. We thought we'd go home."

"You mean to the United States?"

"Not to-night," laughed Adrian. "Just to the house where we are living. It belongs to old Santiago."

"Who is he?"

Briefly the boys narrated what they knew about him on the Rio Grande, how they had met him here, and why they were staying at his house.

"Has he no other name?"

"Why, yes, I suppose so," replied Billie. "We always call him Prince to his face, and his daughter as the Princess Lucia. Of course, it is all make-believe, but it is one way of keeping him quiet."

He called to one of Santiago's servants, whom Lucia had lent them to look after their horses.

"Oh, Chomo!" he said. "Do you know what Santiago's surname is?"

"Si, señor. It is Ojeda."

"What?" cried all the boys at once. "Ojeda? Why, that was old Don Pablo's name."

The boys stood and eyed each other in speechless wonder. The same thought was in all their minds.

"Do you think it is possible?" asked Billie at last.

"Do I think what is possible?" asked Lieutenant Grant.

"Why, that Santiago could have given those drafts to the stranger so as not to be known in the matter."

"Possibly. He seems a man of mystery."

"Well," declared Billie, "I am going to find out."

"How, I should like to know," asked Donald. "He's too crazy to remember anything, even if he wanted to tell you."

"You forget Lucia," said Billie.

"Oh, no, I haven't," laughed Donald, "and I have no doubt she would tell you all about it if she knew; but I do not believe she does. Santiago is too deep to have entrusted his secrets to a girl not yet out of her teens."

"You never can tell," remarked the lieutenant. "Men with a hobby do strange things. You'd better ride along with me to headquarters. I'd like to introduce you to General Funston. He's a man after your own hearts. You know how he went out and captured Aguinaldo when he was in the Philippines."

"I've read about it," replied Adrian. "It was a bold deed."

"Sure was," said Donald. "We'll be mighty glad to meet him."

It may also be said that General Funston was glad to meet the Broncho Rider Boys, especially after Lieutenant Grant told him in a few words of the good work they had done on the border and on the day that Vera Cruz was taken.

"And when do you expect to return to the United States?" asked the general.

"Just as soon as we can obtain passage," replied Donald.

"I think we can arrange that for you in a few days," replied the general. "In the meantime come in occasionally."

The boys thanked him and started to leave, when the telephone in the general's quarters rang. He looked for some one to answer, but no one being at hand, he picked up the 'phone himself.

"What's that?" he asked after a brief moment. "The water works. You think they are attempting to cut you off. All right, I'll rush help."

He set down the 'phone and turned to Lieutenant Grant.

"The enemy has gathered in force about the water works," he said sharply. "They evidently intend cutting off the water supply. Tell Colonel Bright to send them reinforcements at once. Do you boys know the way there?"

"Yes, sir," from all three.

"Then show the men the nearest way! Now go! The safety of the city may depend upon you!"