CHAPTER XIX.

AN UNUSUAL RIDING PARTY.


Flinging themselves into the saddle, the boys rode rapidly after Lieutenant Grant and were at Colonel Bright's quarters by the time the bugle had called to boots and saddle. In another minute, at the head of a squadron of cavalry, they dashed over the road they had come to know so well.

What happened during the next twenty minutes is history.

Guided by the boys, the reinforcements arrived opportunely to stop the advance of a large body of Mexicans who would have destroyed the water works and have left the inhabitants and the American troops entirely without water.

A few minutes later two batteries with rapid-fire guns put in an appearance, and in less time than it takes to tell it, the Mexicans turned and fled.

It was not General Funston's mission in Vera Cruz to overrun any more Mexican territory, so the Mexicans were allowed to retreat without pursuit; but the lines were strengthened so that from that time on there was never any danger from Huerta's forces, although there were numerous alarms and plenty of scout duty.

During the few minutes of fighting, the boys were in the midst of it and all came through it without a scratch. But it was exciting work and when it was over they were publicly thanked by Colonel Bright for their good work.

"Well," laughed Billie as the three rode slowly back to their home, "that's glory enough for one day. I don't care to be a soldier."

"Nor I!" agreed Donald. "I prefer a quiet life on the ranch."

"Which we are in a fair way to see in a few weeks," commented Adrian. "I have no doubt that General Funston will do as he agreed and find us passage."

"I for one shall be glad to return to the States," said Donald.

"So shall I after I have found out about Santiago's connection with that ten thousand pounds."

"That's right," was the laughing rejoinder. "Stick to it, Billie, and who knows what may happen?"

"Do you know," remarked Adrian slowly, "I'm beginning to be considerably worried for the Americans scattered throughout Mexico."

"Why should you be?" from Donald.

"I remember Pedro's words that, if the United States did anything, Carranza would unite with Huerta."

"I don't believe he would."

"Maybe not. But the Zapata brothers will think this a good time to make the Americans trouble. I was thinking of Mr. Black and Josie."

"I'll bet you were," laughed Billie. "I wouldn't be surprised if they were thinking about you. Hey, Don?"

"Well, they might do worse," said Donald. "There are worse fellows than Adrian."

"That's right," retorted Adrian good-humoredly. "I can stand it. But, just the same, I wish I knew they were safe."

"Well, what's the matter with our paying them a visit?" queried Billie.

"Nix," from Donald. "We'll stay inside the lines. I've had enough of this bush fighting."

They approached Santiago's residence, where they had decided to remain until they sailed, when they perceived a peon on a pony standing by the gate. As they drew near they recognized him as one of the peons who had served as Mr. Black's mozo.

"Why, hello, José!" exclaimed Donald. "What brings you here?"

The mozo drew a letter from beneath his poncho and handed it to Donald.

"For me?" asked Donald. "I thought it must be for Adrian. I didn't think the----"

"It is from the jefe," interrupted the mozo.

"Oh, it's from Mr. Black!" with an accent on the Mr. "That's different."

Donald opened the letter and read it hastily.

"Well, by George!" he exclaimed, "what do you think of that?"

"I can tell you better when I know what that is," replied Billie.

"Why, Mr. Black is becoming alarmed over the activities of the Carranza forces and wants us to ask General Funston if he won't send out enough cavalry to escort him and his daughter to Vera Cruz in safety."

"Of course we'll ask him!" exclaimed Adrian. "Let's do it at once."

"Now wait a minute," said Donald. "Let's see about it."

"What is there to see?"

"There's a good deal to see. You remember our experiences on the Rio Grande?"

"But this is different! We are at war with Mexico now."

"No, we are not. We have simply seized one port as a reprisal. To send a cavalry force out into the country might bring on more trouble."

"Well, I don't care!" exclaimed Adrian hotly. "I'll go and ask him alone if you are afraid to go with me. I'm not going to leave Jos--I mean Mr. Black and his daughter out there at the mercies of these greasers. You hear me!"

"Oh, we'll go with you, all right!" said Billie. "But don't be surprised if you don't get what you ask."

Accordingly the trio started for General Funston's headquarters. After some delay they were admitted to his presence and Donald showed him Mr. Black's letter.

The general perused it carefully and then remained silently thoughtful for some moments.

"I wish I could do what our countryman asks," he finally said, "but I do not see how I can. To send a force out nearly fifty miles, even for such a service, would be overstepping the purpose for which I am here. I----"

"But you wouldn't leave them out there to be mistreated and perhaps killed, would you?" interrupted Adrian.

The general smiled.

"Such is not my intention; but we must plan some other way. We must use a little strategy."

"That's right!" exclaimed Billie, "and I'll bet the man who went out and rounded up Aguinaldo will know how to do it!"

Again the general smiled broadly, evidently well pleased at the implied compliment.

"I'll do the best I can," he said quietly, "but I am not very familiar with the lay of the land. You boys have had some experience. Perhaps you can suggest something."

Adrian said nothing, and Donald scratched his head. It was Billie who spoke.

"I was just wondering, General," he said, "if some of the men wouldn't like to take a little horseback ride and see something of the country."

"Well, now, perhaps they might," assented the general.

"We could show them some mighty fine scenery, sir."

"By the moonlight, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir. By the moonlight and early sunrise."

"And about how many would you like to take on this picnic?"

"Well," replied Billie, squinting up one eye, "I was thinking that Adrian and I might take out about ten to-night. Then about the same time to-morrow night Don could take another ten. We would probably meet somewhere in the mountains and watch the sun rise."

"A very nice plan," said the general, "and one of which I approve. You may ask Lieutenant Grant to make enquiries among the men in his company and see if there are any who would like to be given two or three days' leave for such a purpose."

"Thank you, sir!" and Billie touched his hat in true military style.

"And you might say to the lieutenant," was General Funston's parting words, "that I should be glad to hear later how the men enjoyed their ride. I think, now that the boys are down here, they should be given a chance to see the country."

"Billie, you have the making of a great general," was Donald's comment as they left the general's quarters. "How did you think of it?"

"I remembered my experience when I wanted men to help me get you and Ad out of trouble in Presidio. Lieutenant Grant will know all about it."

And so he did. In less than half an hour ten regulars, some of them but very little older than Billie and Adrian, were ready for the ride which Billie had proposed and which in his mind would be as far as Moreno.

"You are sure ten will be enough?" asked Lieutenant Grant.

"Sure! Twelve Americans are enough to lick fifty Mexicans if it comes to that; and besides we shall have Mr. Black and Josie. He's as good as four."

"And don't forget the reinforcements, if they are needed," laughed Donald. "We will be right on the spot where we saw the sun rise the first morning after we left Moreno."

"It looks all right," was Lieutenant Grant's comment, "but it is always well to have a big enough force. Success to you!"

"You'll make all the necessary explanations to the crowd you bring out, Don," was Billie's parting words. "Adrian and I will explain the nature of the trip to our fellows as we ride along."

This they did, and gave the soldier boys a little history of their own troubles in reaching Vera Cruz.

"No explanations are necessary," remarked a young chap by the name of Brooks, a corporal. "We saw you out at the water works and we know you are made of the right stuff. You lead! We'll follow, won't we, boys?"

"You bet!" replied the others in one voice.