CHAPTER XXIII.

A DINNER AND ITS RESULT.


With a shout the Mexicans broke into the clearing which the Americans had just left. They were a motley crowd, not much like the cavalry that forms such a great part of Uncle Sam's army.

"It seems a shame to hurt them," muttered the corporal. "They look as though they would run if you said boo!"

Seeing no one, the Mexicans, some twenty or twenty-five in number, came to a halt and their leaders held a council of war.

The Americans, a couple of rods back in the woods, partly concealed by the trees and partly by the deepening twilight, watched them silently.

After a couple of minutes' confab, the captain of the band gave an order which the boys could not hear and a couple of Mexicans dismounted and began carefully to examine the ground. They were looking for the prints of horses' hoofs.

"_Aqui'sta!_" exclaimed one of the men on foot, pointing to the ground.

The captain drew near and leaned over from his horse to see more clearly.

He was evidently satisfied, for he straightened up and gave another command and the two horsemen sprang to their saddles.

Another command and every man's sabre flashed in the air.

Raising his own sabre aloft, the captain was about to give another command, when there was the sound of a single shot from the rear and the captain's sabre went flying from his hand, struck by a rifle ball.

"_Carramba!_" he cried. "_Emboscado!_" meaning "an ambush," and putting spurs to his horse he turned and fled in the direction from which he had come, followed by the entire band, while the Americans fired a volley into the air.

"They'll never stop running," laughed the corporal, "until they reach home--wherever that is."

"And in the meantime we'll get out of here," said Mr. Black.

The men sprang to their feet and to their horses. At the same moment there came from the woods to the left the well-known whistle of the Broncho Rider Boys.

"It's Don!" cried Billie, as he gave the answering call, and an instant later Donald came into view through the trees, closely followed by half a score of Uncle Sam's troopers.

"Just too late," said Adrian.

"Too late for what?" queried Donald.

"To see a masterly retreat," and in a few words he told Donald what had occurred.

"Well," was the rejoinder, "I am glad no blood was shed. But who fired the shot from the rear?"

"I," came a voice, and out of the shadows appeared a figure which had a most familiar appearance. "If you don't recognize me," he continued, "you may recognize Ambrosio."

"By George!" exclaimed Billie, "if it isn't our old friend Strong. Where on earth did you come from?"

"I suppose I might ask you the same thing," was the laughing reply. "Briefly, I am on my way to Vera Cruz. I heard there was a band of American brigands out in the mountains and I thought I might fall in with them."

"So that's what they call us, is it?" said Billie. "I never expected to be called a brigand."

"Strange things happen to men who travel," declared Strong facetiously; "but you'd better be going. There are some good troops in this section and they are on the lookout."

"Good advice," muttered the old trooper. "This ain't no pleasure excursion."

"Sorry we haven't a horse for you," said Adrian to Strong, "but I guess you are used to walking."

"A good deal more so than riding. But, if one of you don't mind giving Ambrosio a lift, it will help some."

Several expressed their willingness to take the ape on behind, but he would go to no one but Billie.

"All right, old man," laughed the boy; "but no funny business," and he broke off a twig and shook it at Ambrosio. "You see this."

Now that the two companies had united, they broke away from the railroad and made a bee line toward Vera Cruz, arriving in sight of the city at daybreak.

"Here's where we part company with the troopers," explained Donald. "We six and Ambrosio will ride into town together and the boys will come in as they wish. There must be no suggestion of a military expedition."

"I see," said Mr. Black, "and I want to thank you all for your kindness to my daughter and to me. That is about all I can do now. Perhaps some day I can do more."

"That's enough," muttered the old trooper, "unless you can get us all sent back home. I can't see any use of keeping us here."

"That's all right, old man," laughed the corporal. "You know you would not go home if you could."

"Better not give me a chance," was the grumbling reply, as the trooper bit off a big piece of tobacco and tucked it away in his cheek.

Reveille was just sounding when the boys, accompanied by their three friends and Ambrosio, perched upon Billie's horse, drew up in front of Lieut. Grant's quarters. They had been recognized and passed through the lines, and as the men caught sight of them they were given a hearty cheer.

"You seem to have made friends," laughed the lieutenant as he greeted them, "and there is every reason why you should. The general will be glad to see you and hear your report. I have no doubt you have a good story to tell, and he likes a good story."

When the boys reached home they found the gate still locked, although it was now considerably past the time when the household was astir. Their knock was answered by the _portero_, who, in response to a question by Billie, said that Santiago was seriously ill and had been for thirty-six hours.

"What is the matter?" asked Donald.

"Fever."

"I am not surprised," declared Adrian. "The strange thoughts he has been thinking so many days were bound to result in something serious."

"Perhaps it is not convenient for us to remain here," said Mr. Black. "We can, I am sure, find some other place."

But at this moment Lucia appeared at the head of the stairs. When made acquainted with Mr. Black's words she would not hear of his taking Josie to any other house and gave orders for making her perfectly at home. The only one who did not remain was Strong.

"I'll come back this evening," he said. "I have a strange story to tell you boys and I may need your help in locating a man I am most anxious to find."

But he did not come back that evening, and when he did come the next night the boys were not there, having been invited to dine with Gen. Funston. Had things not happened thus, a part of this story could never have been written, for it was while dining with the general that the boys were given a duty to perform, which was the most arduous of all their adventures in the land of the Montezumas.

And this was the manner of it.

They were just finishing dinner and Billie was congratulating himself that he had had his fill of good American cooking, when an aide announced that a Mexican gentleman, Don Esteban Mendoza, craved an immediate audience with Gen. Funston.

"I am sure you young gentlemen will excuse me a few minutes," said the general, "as Don Esteban is one of the prominent bankers of the city and I know his business must be of importance."

The boys were glad to accept the proffered excuse and the general withdrew, leaving them in the company of several members of his staff, to whom they briefly related their recent adventure. When they told of the "ambush" there was much amusement.

In the midst of their conversation the general returned accompanied by Don Esteban.

"These are the young gentlemen to whom I referred," explained the general, introducing the boys. "They are typical Americans and, being civilians and speaking Spanish fluently, will be just the ones to help you in your trouble."

Then to the boys: "Don Esteban has a very delicate mission for which he asks the assistance of Americans. He wished me to detail three young officers for the work, but this I do not feel I can do, as it is strictly a private mission. If you feel that you can undertake it, he will be glad to explain it to you."

"Anything that you recommend, General, we shall be glad to undertake," replied Donald, acting as spokesman for the trio.

"Then I shall turn you over to Don Esteban, and as his business is pressing, I will excuse you if you wish to accompany him home."

"A thousand thanks, General," said Don Esteban effusively. Then to the boys: "My automobile is at the door. If you will take seats in it, we shall be speedily at my house. You will pardon me if I speak nothing but Spanish, as I know very little English, although"--with an expressive glance at Gen. Funston--"I hope to know it better."

Following Don Esteban, they were soon speeding through the streets and five minutes later entered a handsome patio.

"This is my house," said Don Esteban. "Be pleased to consider it your own. Now, if you will follow me to the library, I will explain the mission I wish you to undertake."

The boys followed without a word, but as they passed up the stairs Billie muttered under his breath:

"Did you notice, boys, that this house backs right up against Santiago's?"