 It was with an effort that Houston gave no indication that he had heard.  Before, there had been only suspicions, one flimsy clue leading to another, a building-block process, which, in its culmination, had determined Barry to take a trip into the West to see for himself.  He had believed that it would be a long process, the finding of a certain telegram and the possibilities which might ensue if this bit of evidence should turn out to be the thing he had suspected.  He had not, however, hoped to have from the lips of the man himself a confession that conditions were not right at the lumber mill of which Barry Houston now formed the executive head; to receive the certain statement that somewhere, somehow, something was wrong, something which was working against the best interests of himself and the stern necessities of the future.  But now--

Thayer had turned away and evidently sought a chair at the other side of the room.  Barry remained perfectly still.  Five minutes passed. Ten.  There came no sound from the chair; instinctively the man on the bed knew that Thayer was watching him, waiting for the first flicker of an eyelid, the first evidence of returning consciousness.  Five minutes more and Barry rewarded the vigil.  He drew his breath in a shivering sigh.  He turned and groaned,--quite naturally with the pain from his splintered arm.  His eyes opened slowly, and he stared about him, as though in non-understanding wonderment, finally to center upon the window ahead and retain his gaze there, oblivious of the sudden tensity of the thin-faced Thayer.  Barry Houston was playing for time, playing a game of identities.  In the same room was a man he felt sure to be an enemy, a man who had in his care everything Barry Houston possessed in the world, every hope, every dream, every chance for the wiping out of a thing that had formed a black blot in the life of the young man for two grim years, and a man who, Barry Houston now felt certain, had not held true to his trust.  Still steadily staring, he pretended not to notice the tall, angular form of Fred Thayer as that person crossed the brightness of the window and turned toward the bed.  And when at last he did look up into the narrow, sunken face, it was with eyes which carried in them no light of friendship, nor even the faintest air of recognition.  Thayer put forth a gnarled, frost-twisted hand.

"Hello, kid," he announced, his thin lips twisting into a cynical smile that in days gone by had passed as an affectation.  Barry looked blankly at him.

"Hello."

"How'd you get hurt?"

"I don't know."

"Old Man Renaud here says you fell over the side of Two Mile Hill.  He picked you up about six o'clock this morning.  Don't you remember?"

"Remember what?"  The blank look still remained.  Thayer moved closer to the bed and bending, stared at him.

"Why, the accident.  I'm Thayer, you know--Thayer, your manager at the Empire Lake mill."

"Have I a manager?"

The thin man drew back at this and stood for a moment staring down at Houston.  Then he laughed and rubbed his gnarled hands.

"I hope you've got a manager.  You--you haven't fired me, have you?"

Barry turned his head wearily, as though the conversation were ended.

"I don't know what you are talking about."

"You--don't--say, you're Barry Houston, aren't you?"

"I?  Am I?"

"Well, then, who are you?"

The man on the bed smiled.

"I'd like to have you tell me.  I don't know myself."

"Don't you know your name?"

"Have I one?"

Thayer, wondering now, drew a hand across his forehead and stood for a moment in disconcerted silence.  Again he started to frame a question, only to desist.  Then, hesitatingly, he turned and walked to the door.

"Ba'tiste."

"Ah, _oui_!"

"Come in here, will you?  I'm up against a funny proposition.  Mr. Houston doesn't seem to be able to remember who he is."

"Ah!"  Then came the sound of heavy steps, and Barry glanced toward the door, to see framed there the gigantic form of a grinning, bearded man, his long arms hanging with the looseness of tremendous strength, his gray eyes gleaming with twinkling interest, his whole being and build that of a great, good-humored, eccentric giant.  His beard was splotched with gray, as was the hair which hung in short, unbarbered strands about his ears.  But the hint of age was nullified by the cocky angle of the blue-knit cap upon his head, the blazing red of his double-breasted pearl-buttoned shirt, the flexible freedom of his muscles as he strode within.  Beside him trotted a great gray cross-breed dog, which betokened collie and timber wolf, and which progressed step by step at his master's knee.  Close to the bed they came, the great form bending, the twinkling, sharp eyes boring into those of Houston, until the younger man gave up the contest and turned his head,--to look once more upon the form of the girl, waiting wonderingly in the doorway.  Then the voice came, rumbling, yet pleasant:

"He no remember, eh?"

"No.  I know him all right.  It's Barry Houston--I've been expecting him to drop in most any day.  Of course, I haven't seen him since he was a kid out here with his father--but that doesn't make any difference.  The family resemblance is there--he's got his father's eyes and mouth and nose, and his voice.  But I can't get him to remember it.  He can't recall anything about his fall, or his name or business.  I guess the accident--"

"Eet is the--"  Ba'tiste was waving one hand vaguely, then placing a finger to his forehead, in a vain struggle for a word.  "Eet is the--what-you-say--"

"Amnesia."  The answer had come quietly from the girl.  Ba'tiste turned excitedly.

"Ah, _oui_!  Eet is the amnesia.  Many time I have seen it--" he waved a hand--"across the way, _ne c'est pas_?  Eet is when the mind he will no work--what you say--he will not stick on the job.  See--" he gesticulated now with both hands--"eet is like a wall.  I see eet with the shell shock.  Eet is all the same.  The wall is knock down--eet will not hold together.  Blooey--" he waved his hands--"the man he no longer remember!"

This time the stare in Barry Houston's eyes was genuine.  To hear a girl of the mountains name a particular form of mental ailment, and then to further listen to that ailment described in its symptoms by a grinning, bearded giant of the woods was a bit past the comprehension of the injured man.  He had half expected the girl to say "them" and "that there", though the trimness of her dress, the smoothness of her small, well-shod feet, the air of refinement which spoke even before her lips had uttered a word should have told him differently.  As for the giant, Ba'tiste, with his outlandish clothing, his corduroy trousers and high-laced, hob-nailed boots, his fawning, half-breed dog, his blazing shirt and kippy little knit cap, the surprise was all the greater.  But that surprise, it seemed, did not extend to the other listener.  Thayer had bobbed his head as though in deference to an authority.  When he spoke, Barry thought that he discerned a tone of enthusiasm, of hope:

"Do they ever get over it?"

"Sometime, yes.  Sometime--no.  Eet all depend."

"Then there isn't any time limit on a thing like this."

"No.  Sometime a year--sometime a week--sometime never.  It all depend. Sometime he get a shock--something happen quick, sudden--blooey--he come back, he say 'where am I', and he be back again, same like he was before!"  Ba'tiste gesticulated vigorously.  Thayer moved toward the door.

"Then I guess there's nothing more for me to do, except to drop in every few days and see how he's getting along.  You'll take good care of him?"

"Ah, _oui_."

"Good.  Want to walk a piece down the road--with me, Medaine?"

"Of course.  It's too bad, isn't it--"

Then they faded through the doorway, and Barry could hear no more.  But he found himself looking after them, wondering about many things,--about the girl and her interest in Fred Thayer, and whether she too might be a part of the machinery which he felt had been set up against him; about the big, grinning Ba'tiste, who still remained in the room; who now was fumbling about with the bedclothes at the foot of the bed and--

"Ouch!  Don't--don't do that!"

Barry suddenly had ceased his thoughts to jerk his feet far up under the covers, laughing and choking and striving to talk at the same time. At the foot of the bed, Ba'tiste, his eyes twinkling more than ever, had calmly rolled back the covering and just as calmly tickled the injured man's feet.  More, one long arm had outstretched again, as the giant once more reached for the sole of a foot, to tickle it, then to stand back and boom with laughter as Barry involuntarily sought to jerk the point of attack out of the way.  For a fourth time he repeated the performance, followed by a fourth outburst of mirth at the recoil from the injured man.  Barry frowned.

"Pardon me," he said rather caustically.  "But I don't get the joke."

"Ho, ho!" and Ba'tiste turned to talk to the shaggy dog at his side. "_L'enfant_ feels it!  _L'enfant_ feels it!"

"Feel it," grunted Houston.  "Of course I feel it!  I'm ticklish."

"You hear, Golemar?"  Ba'tiste, contorted with merriment, pointed vaguely in the direction of the bed, "M'sieu l' Nobody, heem is ticklish!"

"Of course I'm ticklish.  Who isn't, on the bottom of his feet?"

The statement only brought a new outburst from the giant.  It nettled Houston; further, it caused him pain to be jerking constantly about the bed in an effort to evade the tickling touch of the trapper's big fingers.  Once more Ba'tiste leaned forward and wiggled his fingers as if in preparation for a new assault, and once more Barry withdrew his pedal extremities to a place of safety.

"Please don't," he begged.  "I--I don't know what kind of a game you're playing--and I'm perfectly willing to join in on it when I feel better--but now it hurts my arm to be bouncing around this way.  Maybe this afternoon--if you've got to play these fool games--I'll feel better--"

The thunder of the other man's laugh cut him off.  Ba'tiste was now, it seemed, in a perfect orgy of merriment.  As though weakened by his laughter, he reeled to the wall and leaned there, his big arms hanging loosely, the tears rolling down his cheeks and disappearing in the gray beard, his face reddened, his whole form shaking with series after series of chuckles.

"You hear heem?" he gasped at the wolf-dog.  "M'sieu l' Nobody, he will play with us this afternoon!  M'sieu l' Ticklefoot!  That is heem, my Golemar, M'sieu l' Ticklefoot!  Oh, ho--M'sieu l' Ticklefoot!"

"What in thunder is the big idea?"  Barry Houston had lost his reserve now.  "I want to be a good fellow--but for the love of Mike let me in on the joke.  I can't get it.  I don't see anything funny in lying here with a broken arm and having my feet tickled.  Of course, I'm grateful to you for picking me up and all that sort of thing, but--"

Choking back the laughter, Ba'tiste returned to the foot of the bed and stood wiping the tears from his eyes.

"Pardon, _mon ami_," came seriously at last.  "Old Ba'teese must have his joke.  Listen, Ba'teese tell you something.  You see people here today, _oui_, yes?  You see, the petite Medaine?  Ah, _oui_!"  He clustered his fingers to his lips and blew a kiss toward the ceiling. "She is the, what-you-say, fine li'l keed.  She is the--_bon bébé_! You no nev' see her before?"

Barry shook his head.  Ba'tiste went on.

"You see M'sieu Thayer?  _Oui_?  You know heem?"

"No."

"You sure?"

"Never saw him before."

"So?"  Batiste grinned and wagged a finger, "Ba'teese he like the truth, yes, _oui_.  Ba'teese he don't get the truth, he tickle M'sieu's feet."

"Now listen!  Please--"

"No--no!"  The giant waved a hand in dismissal of threat.  "Old Ba'teese, he still joke.  Ba'teese say he tell you something.  Eet is this.  You see those people?  All right.  _Bon_--good.  You don' know one.  You know the other.  Yes?  _Oui_?  Ba'teese not know why you do it.  Ba'teese not care.  Ba'teese is right--in here."  He patted his heart with a big hand.  "But you--you not tell the truth.  I know.  I tickle your feet."

"You're crazy!"

"So, mebbe.  Ba'teese have his trouble.  Sometime Ba'teese wish he go crazy--like you say."

The face suddenly aged.  The twinkling light left the eyes.  The big hands knitted, and the man was silent for a long moment.  Then, "But Ba'-teese he know--see?"  He pointed to his head, then twisting, ran his finger down his spine.  "When eet is the--what-you-say, amnesia--the nerve eet no work in the foot.  I could tickle, tickle, tickle, and you would not know.  But with you--blooey--right away, you feel.  So, for some reason, you are, what-you-say?--shamming.  But you are Ba'teese' gues'.  You sleep in Ba'teese' bed.  You eat Ba'teese' food.  So long as that, you are Ba'teese' friend.  Ba'teese--" he looked with quiet, fatherly eyes toward the young man on the bed--"shall ask no question--and Ba'teese shall tell no tales!"



