CHAPTER I


By half-past seven in the morning, the ship being then inside the harbour at last and moored within a long stone’s-throw from the quay, my stock of philosophy was nearly exhausted.  I was dressing hurriedly in my cabin when the steward came tripping in with a morning suit over his arm.

Hungry, tired, and depressed, with my head engaged inside a white shirt irritatingly stuck together by too much starch, I desired him peevishly to “heave round with that breakfast.”  I wanted to get ashore as soon as possible.

“Yes, sir.  Ready at eight, sir.  There’s a gentleman from the shore waiting to speak to you, sir.”

This statement was curiously slurred over.  I dragged the shirt violently over my head and emerged staring.

“So early!” I cried.  “Who’s he?  What does he want?”

On coming in from sea one has to pick up the conditions of an utterly unrelated existence.  Every little event at first has the peculiar emphasis of novelty.  I was greatly surprised by that early caller; but there was no reason for my steward to look so particularly foolish.

“Didn’t you ask for the name?” I inquired in a stern tone.

“His name’s Jacobus, I believe,” he mumbled shamefacedly.

“Mr. Jacobus!” I exclaimed loudly, more surprised than ever, but with a total change of feeling.  “Why couldn’t you say so at once?”

But the fellow had scuttled out of my room.  Through the momentarily opened door I had a glimpse of a tall, stout man standing in the cuddy by the table on which the cloth was already laid; a “harbour” table-cloth, stainless and dazzlingly white.  So far good.

I shouted courteously through the closed door, that I was dressing and would be with him in a moment.  In return the assurance that there was no hurry reached me in the visitor’s deep, quiet undertone.  His time was my own.  He dared say I would give him a cup of coffee presently.

“I am afraid you will have a poor breakfast,” I cried apologetically. “We have been sixty-one days at sea, you know.”

A quiet little laugh, with a “That’ll be all right, Captain,” was his answer.  All this, words, intonation, the glimpsed attitude of the man in the cuddy, had an unexpected character, a something friendly in it—propitiatory.  And my surprise was not diminished thereby.  What did this call mean?  Was it the sign of some dark design against my commercial innocence?

Ah!  These commercial interests—spoiling the finest life under the sun. Why must the sea be used for trade—and for war as well?  Why kill and traffic on it, pursuing selfish aims of no great importance after all? It would have been so much nicer just to sail about with here and there a port and a bit of land to stretch one’s legs on, buy a few books and get a change of cooking for a while.  But, living in a world more or less homicidal and desperately mercantile, it was plainly my duty to make the best of its opportunities.

My owners’ letter had left it to me, as I have said before, to do my best for the ship, according to my own judgment.  But it contained also a postscript worded somewhat as follows:

“Without meaning to interfere with your liberty of action we are writing by the outgoing mail to some of our business friends there who may be of assistance to you.  We desire you particularly to call on Mr. Jacobus, a prominent merchant and charterer.  Should you hit it off with him he may be able to put you in the way of profitable employment for the ship.”

Hit it off!  Here was the prominent creature absolutely on board asking for the favour of a cup of coffee!  And life not being a fairy-tale the improbability of the event almost shocked me.  Had I discovered an enchanted nook of the earth where wealthy merchants rush fasting on board ships before they are fairly moored?  Was this white magic or merely some black trick of trade?  I came in the end (while making the bow of my tie) to suspect that perhaps I did not get the name right.  I had been thinking of the prominent Mr. Jacobus pretty frequently during the passage and my hearing might have been deceived by some remote similarity of sound. . .  The steward might have said Antrobus—or maybe Jackson.

But coming out of my stateroom with an interrogative “Mr. Jacobus?” I was met by a quiet “Yes,” uttered with a gentle smile.  The “yes” was rather perfunctory.  He did not seem to make much of the fact that he was Mr. Jacobus.  I took stock of a big, pale face, hair thin on the top, whiskers also thin, of a faded nondescript colour, heavy eyelids.  The thick, smooth lips in repose looked as if glued together.  The smile was faint.  A heavy, tranquil man.  I named my two officers, who just then came down to breakfast; but why Mr. Burns’s silent demeanour should suggest suppressed indignation I could not understand.

While we were taking our seats round the table some disconnected words of an altercation going on in the companionway reached my ear.  A stranger apparently wanted to come down to interview me, and the steward was opposing him.

“You can’t see him.”

“Why can’t I?”

“The Captain is at breakfast, I tell you.  He’ll be going on shore presently, and you can speak to him on deck.”

“That’s not fair.  You let—”

“I’ve had nothing to do with that.”

“Oh, yes, you have.  Everybody ought to have the same chance.  You let that fellow—”

The rest I lost.  The person having been repulsed successfully, the steward came down.  I can’t say he looked flushed—he was a mulatto—but he looked flustered.  After putting the dishes on the table he remained by the sideboard with that lackadaisical air of indifference he used to assume when he had done something too clever by half and was afraid of getting into a scrape over it.  The contemptuous expression of Mr. Burns’s face as he looked from him to me was really extraordinary.  I couldn’t imagine what new bee had stung the mate now.

The Captain being silent, nobody else cared to speak, as is the way in ships.  And I was saying nothing simply because I had been made dumb by the splendour of the entertainment.  I had expected the usual sea-breakfast, whereas I beheld spread before us a veritable feast of shore provisions: eggs, sausages, butter which plainly did not come from a Danish tin, cutlets, and even a dish of potatoes.  It was three weeks since I had seen a real, live potato.  I contemplated them with interest, and Mr. Jacobus disclosed himself as a man of human, homely sympathies, and something of a thought-reader.

“Try them, Captain,” he encouraged me in a friendly undertone.  “They are excellent.”

“They look that,” I admitted.  “Grown on the island, I suppose.”

“Oh, no, imported.  Those grown here would be more expensive.”

I was grieved at the ineptitude of the conversation.  Were these the topics for a prominent and wealthy merchant to discuss?  I thought the simplicity with which he made himself at home rather attractive; but what is one to talk about to a man who comes on one suddenly, after sixty-one days at sea, out of a totally unknown little town in an island one has never seen before?  What were (besides sugar) the interests of that crumb of the earth, its gossip, its topics of conversation?  To draw him on business at once would have been almost indecent—or even worse: impolitic.  All I could do at the moment was to keep on in the old groove.

“Are the provisions generally dear here?” I asked, fretting inwardly at my inanity.

“I wouldn’t say that,” he answered placidly, with that appearance of saving his breath his restrained manner of speaking suggested.

He would not be more explicit, yet he did not evade the subject.  Eyeing the table in a spirit of complete abstemiousness (he wouldn’t let me help him to any eatables) he went into details of supply.  The beef was for the most part imported from Madagascar; mutton of course was rare and somewhat expensive, but good goat’s flesh—

“Are these goat’s cutlets?” I exclaimed hastily, pointing at one of the dishes.

Posed sentimentally by the sideboard, the steward gave a start.

“Lor’, no, sir!  It’s real mutton!”

Mr. Burns got through his breakfast impatiently, as if exasperated by being made a party to some monstrous foolishness, muttered a curt excuse, and went on deck.  Shortly afterwards the second mate took his smooth red countenance out of the cabin.  With the appetite of a schoolboy, and after two months of sea-fare, he appreciated the generous spread.  But I did not.  It smacked of extravagance.  All the same, it was a remarkable feat to have produced it so quickly, and I congratulated the steward on his smartness in a somewhat ominous tone.  He gave me a deprecatory smile and, in a way I didn’t know what to make of, blinked his fine dark eyes in the direction of the guest.

The latter asked under his breath for another cup of coffee, and nibbled ascetically at a piece of very hard ship’s biscuit.  I don’t think he consumed a square inch in the end; but meantime he gave me, casually as it were, a complete account of the sugar crop, of the local business houses, of the state of the freight market.  All that talk was interspersed with hints as to personalities, amounting to veiled warnings, but his pale, fleshy face remained equable, without a gleam, as if ignorant of his voice.  As you may imagine I opened my ears very wide. Every word was precious.  My ideas as to the value of business friendship were being favourably modified.  He gave me the names of all the disponible ships together with their tonnage and the names of their commanders.  From that, which was still commercial information, he condescended to mere harbour gossip.  The _Hilda_ had unaccountably lost her figurehead in the Bay of Bengal, and her captain was greatly affected by this.  He and the ship had been getting on in years together and the old gentleman imagined this strange event to be the forerunner of his own early dissolution.  The _Stella_ had experienced awful weather off the Cape—had her decks swept, and the chief officer washed overboard.  And only a few hours before reaching port the baby died.

Poor Captain H— and his wife were terribly cut up.  If they had only been able to bring it into port alive it could have been probably saved; but the wind failed them for the last week or so, light breezes, and . . . the baby was going to be buried this afternoon.  He supposed I would attend—

“Do you think I ought to?” I asked, shrinkingly.

He thought so, decidedly.  It would be greatly appreciated.  All the captains in the harbour were going to attend.  Poor Mrs. H— was quite prostrated.  Pretty hard on H— altogether.

“And you, Captain—you are not married I suppose?”

“No, I am not married,” I said.  “Neither married nor even engaged.”

Mentally I thanked my stars; and while he smiled in a musing, dreamy fashion, I expressed my acknowledgments for his visit and for the interesting business information he had been good enough to impart to me. But I said nothing of my wonder thereat.

“Of course, I would have made a point of calling on you in a day or two,” I concluded.

He raised his eyelids distinctly at me, and somehow managed to look rather more sleepy than before.

“In accordance with my owners’ instructions,” I explained.  “You have had their letter, of course?”

By that time he had raised his eyebrows too but without any particular emotion.  On the contrary he struck me then as absolutely imperturbable.

“Oh!  You must be thinking of my brother.”

It was for me, then, to say “Oh!”  But I hope that no more than civil surprise appeared in my voice when I asked him to what, then, I owed the pleasure. . . . He was reaching for an inside pocket leisurely.

“My brother’s a very different person.  But I am well known in this part of the world.  You’ve probably heard—”

I took a card he extended to me.  A thick business card, as I lived! Alfred Jacobus—the other was Ernest—dealer in every description of ship’s stores!  Provisions salt and fresh, oils, paints, rope, canvas, etc., etc.  Ships in harbour victualled by contract on moderate terms—

“I’ve never heard of you,” I said brusquely.

His low-pitched assurance did not abandon him.

“You will be very well satisfied,” he breathed out quietly.

I was not placated.  I had the sense of having been circumvented somehow. Yet I had deceived myself—if there was any deception.  But the confounded cheek of inviting himself to breakfast was enough to deceive any one. And the thought struck me: Why!  The fellow had provided all these eatables himself in the way of business.  I said:

“You must have got up mighty early this morning.”

He admitted with simplicity that he was on the quay before six o’clock waiting for my ship to come in.  He gave me the impression that it would be impossible to get rid of him now.

“If you think we are going to live on that scale,” I said, looking at the table with an irritated eye, “you are jolly well mistaken.”

“You’ll find it all right, Captain.  I quite understand.”

Nothing could disturb his equanimity.  I felt dissatisfied, but I could not very well fly out at him.  He had told me many useful things—and besides he was the brother of that wealthy merchant.  That seemed queer enough.

I rose and told him curtly that I must now go ashore.  At once he offered the use of his boat for all the time of my stay in port.

“I only make a nominal charge,” he continued equably.  “My man remains all day at the landing-steps.  You have only to blow a whistle when you want the boat.”

And, standing aside at every doorway to let me go through first, he carried me off in his custody after all.  As we crossed the quarter-deck two shabby individuals stepped forward and in mournful silence offered me business cards which I took from them without a word under his heavy eye. It was a useless and gloomy ceremony.  They were the touts of the other ship-chandlers, and he placid at my back, ignored their existence.

We parted on the quay, after he had expressed quietly the hope of seeing me often “at the store.”  He had a smoking-room for captains there, with newspapers and a box of “rather decent cigars.”  I left him very unceremoniously.

My consignees received me with the usual business heartiness, but their account of the state of the freight-market was by no means so favourable as the talk of the wrong Jacobus had led me to expect.  Naturally I became inclined now to put my trust in his version, rather.  As I closed the door of the private office behind me I thought to myself: “H’m.  A lot of lies.  Commercial diplomacy.  That’s the sort of thing a man coming from sea has got to expect.  They would try to charter the ship under the market rate.”

In the big, outer room, full of desks, the chief clerk, a tall, lean, shaved person in immaculate white clothes and with a shiny, closely-cropped black head on which silvery gleams came and went, rose from his place and detained me affably.  Anything they could do for me, they would be most happy.  Was I likely to call again in the afternoon? What?  Going to a funeral?  Oh, yes, poor Captain H—.

He pulled a long, sympathetic face for a moment, then, dismissing from this workaday world the baby, which had got ill in a tempest and had died from too much calm at sea, he asked me with a dental, shark-like smile—if sharks had false teeth—whether I had yet made my little arrangements for the ship’s stay in port.

“Yes, with Jacobus,” I answered carelessly.  “I understand he’s the brother of Mr. Ernest Jacobus to whom I have an introduction from my owners.”

I was not sorry to let him know I was not altogether helpless in the hands of his firm.  He screwed his thin lips dubiously.

“Why,” I cried, “isn’t he the brother?”

“Oh, yes. . . . They haven’t spoken to each other for eighteen years,” he added impressively after a pause.

“Indeed!  What’s the quarrel about?”

“Oh, nothing!  Nothing that one would care to mention,” he protested primly.  “He’s got quite a large business.  The best ship-chandler here, without a doubt.  Business is all very well, but there is such a thing as personal character, too, isn’t there?  Good-morning, Captain.”

He went away mincingly to his desk.  He amused me.  He resembled an old maid, a commercial old maid, shocked by some impropriety.  Was it a commercial impropriety?  Commercial impropriety is a serious matter, for it aims at one’s pocket.  Or was he only a purist in conduct who disapproved of Jacobus doing his own touting?  It was certainly undignified.  I wondered how the merchant brother liked it.  But then different countries, different customs.  In a community so isolated and so exclusively “trading” social standards have their own scale.