OF HOW MY LADY PLAYED DELILAH--CONTINUED


AS I crossed the broad terrace, looking neither to the right nor left, the moon flung my dark shadow upon the gravel path and the soft night wind stole through the silent gardens and fanned my face. But my eyes were blind to the beauties of the silvery landscape, light as day itself, and of the starry heavens above me; for it was my lady! my lady! ever my lady! that was my one recurring thought--the sum total of my reflections.

For the time being I was as one distraught, bewitched, indeed, by the spell her beauty had cast upon me. Wild, fleeting visions of the future rose before my eyes. With the fall of the Stuart the old order had changed; who knew what might occur under the new? A good sword coupled with brains might carry a man far upon the road to success in these unsettled times. He who was poor to-day might yet aspire to climb the ladder which led to fame, providing that he was prepared to grasp the means of rising or had wit enough to rightly use his opportunities. Many a man, indeed, dated the foundation of his fortunes to the Revolution, and received a title in reward for his services. Then why not I? The former requisite for success I knew that I already had. I believed that I possessed the brains, or the experience of years of wandering had been in vain. And afterwards----? I had no settled purpose in my brain; all was a chaos, through which my lady’s face alone shone, beckoning me upward.

That William would be successful in the coming struggle I had not the slightest doubt. I knew the man well, for I had fought under him in Flanders; and though, in the light of future history, he may not be considered as a great soldier in the same sense as were his contemporaries, Turenne and Luxembourg, yet he possessed a genius for snatching victory out of defeat. As for James, with the infatuated imbecility that characterised him throughout every great crisis of his career, he had taken no pains to keep up the discipline of his troops during the past winter, wasting his time with his so-called Court at Dublin whilst his army spread over the surrounding country, committing every species of rapine and plunder. One thing above all was plain to me: Ireland at the present time was the field that offered scope for a man’s ambition. There, when blows would shortly be exchanged notice was to be won and promotion achieved. Little did I guess that the battle of the Boyne had already been lost and won, and that even now the mean-spirited James was in full flight for France, after reproaching his army with the cowardice which his own folly had principally engendered.

’Twas in meditating thus that I came at length to the entrance of the rose garden and halted beneath the arch of yew. Before me the fountain gleamed white in the moonlight that flooded all the open space surrounding and flung fantastic shadows of the closely-cropped trees upon the grass. In the distance came faintly to my ears the murmur of the sea, and the gardens around me were full of the voices of the night.

I crossed quickly to the fountain, and even before I reached it I saw the object of my errand lying upon the marble basin. It was in all respects a dainty fan--a thing of painted silk and ivory, with the perfume of violets yet clinging to it, and with my lady’s monogram in gold upon the handle. I lingered for a few moments, holding it in my hand, recalling again the face of its beautiful owner, and pondering upon our late conversation.

Then with a settled purpose in my mind, I retraced my steps by way of the terraces, and so to the house. I found my lady seated in the same room where I had left her. She looked up quickly when I entered and thanked me prettily in a few low-spoken words. The colour had deepened in her cheeks, and I noticed that the hand which she held out for her fan was slightly trembling. But I would have none of her thanks.

“Do not thank me, madam, for so slight a service,” I said quickly. “I would do far more to pleasure your ladyship, a proof of which I am about to give you.” I drew from my breast the folded paper, which I had placed there before leaving the inn. “This paper,” I began slowly, gazing straight at my lady, who had risen in sudden agitation, “of which I took possession in this very hall, under certain circumstances that I doubt not are still fresh in your ladyship’s memory, and that bore a dangerous resemblance to conspiracy, is folded as you see it was folded when it came into my hands.”

She did not seem to comprehend the full significance of my words or to grasp my meaning. I paused for a moment, and continued more slowly: “Am I wrong in supposing this paper to contain the names of a few gallant but misguided gentlemen who favour the cause of James?”

“You should best know, sir,” she replied in a low voice.

“No, my lady,” I answered quietly; “that is where you are wrong. I do not know the contents of this paper, because I have not opened it.”

Still she gazed at me as if she did not understand. On a sudden she drew a step nearer, and I saw the colour fade from her face. Doubtless until this moment she had thought that I had already made use of it--had placed it in the hands of the authorities.

“You--you have not opened it?” she said in a troubled voice.

“No, madam,” I answered. “Scarcely can I expect you to believe me, yet on my honour as a gentleman it is the truth.”

“Then--then--you mean----” she faltered, resting both hands upon the table and leaning forward, probing my eyes as if she would read my soul.

I met her gaze unflinchingly.

“The names that this paper contains are known to you, madam?” I replied quietly.

“Yes,” she whispered; and I saw that she was trembling.

“Then, my lady,” I answered firmly, stepping to the table and holding the paper in the flame of the nearest candle until only a little feathery ash remained, “I give the lives of these gentlemen to you. Your secret is your own.”

“You give them to me, sir?” she cried passionately. “You do this for me? Ah, Mr. Cassilis, why do you shame me so?”

“How, madam?” I said, totally at a loss to understand her words. “Shame you?”

“Yes, yes--shame me,” she continued in the same passionate tone, “by this that you have done for me; by the forbearance that you have shown towards me--towards one who is unworthy----”

“My lady,” I cried, “unworthy?”

“Oh,” she continued, “if you would not believe in me; if you knew all--if you knew!” She broke off and laughed a trifle wildly. “Ah, forget my foolish words!”

“Say, rather, that it will be my happiness to remember them, madam,” I replied gravely; though I confess that I was puzzled at her marked agitation, for which, so far as I could see, there was no adequate reason. “And do not think that I blame you for your devotion to the cause of James. Were there many among his adherents as courageous as yourself, we should speedily see the Stuart back at Whitehall. Though in the accomplishment of this object you have not my sympathy, yet the very boldness of the scheme by which you hoped to effect a rising in this county cannot but command my admiration. The very hopelessness of imagining that you could succeed in the face of William’s settled government would appeal to any soldier.”

“And you who wear his uniform--you to whom these men were enemies--can yet find it in your heart to spare them?” she said in a low voice.

I took two steps towards her.

“Nay, do not credit me with a generosity which a nature such as mine is incapable of forming. A month ago I would have sent these men to death and recked little of the doing, save, indeed, to count it to my credit. Shall I tell your ladyship why I have not done so?”

She made a faint gesture of protest, but I took no heed and continued: “Because I knew that your name headed the list, madam.” And I stopped, overcome by my own temerity.

She had moved to the window while I was speaking, and her face was turned from me. I could not guess what thoughts were passing through her brain, but I fancied that I saw her shoulders heave. Yet she made no reply, though I waited almost trembling for the words that did not come.

“I can feel but little sympathy for men who required a woman’s name to stimulate them to action,” I said at length. “On your part it was a brave deed to do, though a foolish one. Yet had I been in your place, doubtless I, too, should have considered that the end justified the means.”

“Ah,” she cried, turning swiftly to face me, “say those words again! Do you think that, Mr. Cassilis? Do you indeed believe that?”

“What, madam?” I answered, smiling.

“That--that the end justifies the means?” she said almost fiercely. “Surely that is true, is it not?”

“Providing always that the means employed be honourable, madam,” I replied.

“And if not?” she cried quickly. “What if--if I--had given my word--had pledged myself to a certain course--then----”

“I think that the thing is too monstrous for supposition,” I replied firmly. “That aught dishonourable and you could have anything in common is beyond conception.”

Again she turned away to the window, and stood looking over the park. In the silence that followed it was not without a certain guilty surprise that I heard the church clock strike ten. Suddenly I remembered my promise to the sergeant.

“I regret that I must take leave of you, madam,” I said hastily. “I was unaware that the hour had grown so late.”

“You must leave me so soon, Mr. Cassilis?” she said, with a reproachful glance. “I was hoping that you would tell me somewhat of your life abroad.”

“And believe me sincere when I say that it is not from any choice of mine that I cannot stay to gratify your curiosity, madam,” I replied. “To-morrow, should you be of the same mind, I shall count myself fortunate in relating the experiences of a life that has been mostly spent in roving the cities of the Continent. To-night it is impossible, for a soldier’s first obedience is to duty.”

“Do not let me detain you, sir,” she answered somewhat coldly, turning slowly from the window and moving towards the stair.

“I trust, madam,” I said humbly, anxious not to lose her good opinion, “that you are not offended by my abrupt departure?”

“How should that be, Mr. Cassilis?” she replied graciously. “Are we not friends?”

I bowed low to conceal the exultation her words caused me, and then, taking my hat and cloak, I advanced to the table for my pistols. On a sudden I was startled by a low cry of pain from behind me. I turned swiftly at the sound. My lady had stumbled upon the lowest step and had fallen forward upon her hands. She recovered her feet almost immediately, but only to lean with half-closed eyes against the carved oak balustrade.

“Are you ill, madam?” I cried anxiously, crossing quickly to her side.

“No, no, it is nothing, sir,” she gasped. “Only my foot slipped, and my wrist--I am afraid that it is sprained.” And again a piteous little moan that was almost a sob escaped her lips.

“Let me summon assistance, madam,” I said hastily, stepping to the door.

“No, no,” she cried again, “I beg that you will not, sir. Indeed, it is nothing, and I would not alarm my--my sister.”

“Yet I fear that you are in pain, my lady,” I said, pausing irresolutely, my hand upon the handle.

“It will pass, sir,” she answered bravely. “It is foolish of me, and you will think me a great coward, Mr. Cassilis, but I would not cause unnecessary alarm; and if--if I may rest here for a moment, until this faintness is passed----”

As she spoke she moved somewhat unsteadily across the floor and sank again into the chair with a long-drawn, shuddering sigh she strove in vain to suppress.

I stood gazing at her, torn by conflicting emotions. It was growing late and I had already broken my word to the sergeant; yet, almost as if she divined my thoughts, she raised her head.

“Are you still there, sir?” she said in a low voice, with a quiver as of pain in it. “Ah, let me beg of you to leave me!” And she leaned her head upon her hand so that I could no longer see her face--to hide her tears, I fancied.

I flung my cloak and hat from me and returned slowly to her side. She was a woman and in pain. I could do no less.

“Since that you do not desire me to call your women, madam,” I said hesitatingly, “if you would permit me to look at your wrist myself. I am possessed of some slight knowledge of surgery,” I continued, growing bolder at her silence--“a knowledge acquired by many years’ familiarity with wounds and sickness in foreign lands.”

She did not make any reply to this, nor even a gesture of dissent. I waited for a few moments in silence.

“May I, madam?” I said at length, in a voice I strove to render steady.

“If you would be so good, sir,” she murmured.

With my heart beating furiously, I sank upon one knee beside her and gently took her white hand in both my own strong brown ones. Gently as I raised it, however, at my touch I saw a tremor of pain pass through her.

It was with momentary surprise that as she turned her face swiftly towards me I noted there were no traces of tears upon her cheeks, but that her eyes were hard and glittering. Yet I was in no condition to remark upon this at the time, for the warm touch of her hand rendered me scarcely less agitated than she was for some reason herself. As I gazed at the soft, white wrist and jewelled fingers resting quietly in mine, in the silence of the room I could hear the loud beating of my own heart, and I know that my hands were trembling.

For now that I was in such near proximity to her, I fell beneath the spell of her wondrous beauty, as many a better man, I ween, had done before me. So close, indeed, was I, that a fold of her rich gown swept my knee--so close that I could mark every heave of her white bosom as it rose and fell stormily; and the perfume of her presence was in my nostrils.

In that moment, with the lovely, flower-like face in its frame of gold so close to mine, I forgot my promise to the sergeant--the lateness of the hour--the difference of rank--my duty--all!

Kneeling there at her feet, I would have given up honour, life--nay, my very hope of heaven itself, to do her pleasure. Madness, you will say. Aye, such madness as moved the first unhappy parent of our race--madness which women will inspire till time shall be no more.

Something of what was passing in my mind must have appeared in my face, for my lady shrank back a little and made as if to withdraw her hand; and at that I bent my head to hide my tell-tale eyes and made a brief examination of her wrist. There was no sign of bruise upon the white, rounded arm--such an arm as Venus herself might have envied, where the blue veins meandered beneath a skin as soft as velvet.

“I do not think that the injury sustained is serious, madam,” I said after a few moments. “Nevertheless, it were well to avoid using your hand as much as possible until it has been seen by your own physician.”

As I was speaking, I took the silken scarf that I wore at my throat and deftly bound it round her wrist, in the manner that I had watched a little French surgeon do the like for me, when an unlucky fall from my horse had once kept my sword within its sheath for well-nigh a month.

“There, madam,” I said in a low voice, tying the ends of the scarf into a bow, “I think that for the present, at least, that bandage will serve, for fault of a better one.” And, moved by a sudden uncontrollable impulse, I raised her hand to my lips.

Again a quick shudder passed through her, and with a low, startled cry she snatched away her hand almost roughly and rose quickly to her feet.

And I rose, too, and our eyes met.

“Ah, forgive me, madam!” I said humbly. “I fear that my roughness has hurt you. Yet God knows how willingly I would bear your pain.”

“Yes, yes,” she cried passionately, “I am in pain, but not as you think, sir. It is your solicitude for me, your generous care for me, that hurts me--that brands me to-night with shame. And yet--and yet--” she muttered, passing her hand across her brow, “you have said that the end justifies the means. They were your own words, sir.”

“With a qualification, madam,” I said quietly.

She raised her hand with a gesture of entreaty.

“Spare me!” she cried, with increased agitation. “Do not add by your words to the sense of infamy I feel. Perhaps even yet it is not too late--perhaps--ah!----” She broke off with a sudden gasp and I saw the colour had forsaken her face.

Thinking nothing but that the faintness had returned to her, I took a step hurriedly towards her. But in a moment I realised that she was not looking at me, but that her gaze was rivetted upon something behind my back.

I turned swiftly to glance at the open window. And there a sight met my eyes that caused me to pause in genuine astonishment.

I have already said that above the trees of the park rose the square Norman tower of the church; and now upon the summit of the tower a bright light suddenly flashed, that grew momentarily in volume, until a broad sheet of flame ascended into the sky. Some one had kindled a fire upon the church tower--for what? One object, and one alone, was possible. It was a signal. And even as I gazed, upon the still night air came the sound of two shots fired in quick succession--aye, and following hard upon them a dozen straggling reports--and then silence. But with those reports the instincts of the soldier returned to me. There was danger, then--danger at the village--and I was not there to share!

I stood for a moment summing up all the possibilities of the situation; and in that moment a dozen or more lanterns broke from the woodland path that led to the village, and a little crowd of dark figures, with here and there the moonlight giving back the flash of steel, made straight for the terrace. At that my brain cleared with lightning rapidity, and turning swiftly, I snatched my pistols from the table.

Was it force of habit merely, or some dim suspicion of the truth that caused me to bend closer to look at them in the light of the candles?

A single glance was sufficient. The flints had been removed--the weapons were useless! I stood staring at them in dull perplexity; and then I raised my eyes and they fell upon my lady.

She was standing upon the hearth, erect and motionless, both hands pressed against her bosom, gazing at me with a strange expression, half fearful, half defiant, as if some secret struggle were raging in her breast. She did not speak; there was no need for words. In her face, her attitude, I received the full confirmation of my suspicions--read the truth in all its naked hideousness.

Now I remembered all too late that I had left my spare flints in my holsters. Now I understood only too well for what purpose my lady had left her fan in the garden, who it was that had tampered with the weapons in my hands. With a sickening feeling of despair I realised that all this time she had been but playing a part, had been the lure to keep me from the village while they worked their will upon the men whom I commanded. Her graciousness, her altered demeanour towards me, had been but assumed--part of the snare into which, despite my boasted knowledge of the world, I had fallen as easily as any rustic Corydon.

On a sudden, still with her eyes on mine, my lady slowly raised her injured arm. Slowly, slowly, she raised it, then with a quick, passionate gesture she tore the bandage from her wrist and flung it into the empty grate behind her. That broke the spell.

With a long-drawn, shivering breath I recovered my composure. “God forgive you, madam,” I said quietly; “for I believe that you have sent me to my death.” And without further word or glance at her, I threw my useless pistols upon the floor at her feet, and, drawing my sword, stepped through the open window. But as I set foot upon the terrace I realised to the full my danger; for upon turning to the left, intending, if possible, to reach the stables, I saw the steward and the youth Martin advancing from their direction, and the moonlight shone upon the barrels of the muskets in their hands. They raised a shout at my sudden appearance, but they dared not fire, for I was between them and their friends advancing from the opposite end of the terrace, who now, indeed, were within a hundred feet of me. And before me was the moat, which even if I could by any means clear (and my heavy riding boots rendered the chance more than doubtful), to cross the open lawns exposed to their shot was but to court certain death.

Moreover, small desire of escape was there in my heart; for so stung was I by the knowledge of my lady’s treachery and of my own disgrace, that I was minded to die rather, and so to hide my shame. How after this could I face my comrades, with the knowledge that I had betrayed the trust reposed in me, and, despite my age and experience, had been tricked, cozened, cheated by a woman, like the veriest country clown.

A little to my right two buttresses projecting from the wall offered security from all save a frontal attack. Between these I ensconced myself and awaited my enemies with the desperate determination of selling my life as dearly as possible. In a moment they were around me--a score or more of the hardier rogues from the village, armed for the most part with pitchforks and scythe blades lashed to poles, and led by Sir Rupert Courtenay, my lady’s cousin.

Seeing me standing there, stern and motionless, they came to a sudden halt, and the shouts with which they had before greeted my appearance died away to silence.

“Give up your sword, sir,” said the young baronet sharply. “Your troopers are in our hands and resistance is futile.”

At that I put aside the thrust of a scythe blade from the man who was nearest to me, at the same time slashing him across the wrist, and as the knaves drew back a little, not relishing their reception, I condescended to give him an answer.

“On guard, sir,” I said through my set teeth. “Unless, indeed, you prefer to stand by and let your followers murder me. Undoubtedly it is your safest course.”

For a moment he hesitated, thinking, I make no doubt, of the fair girl who awaited him within the house, or perhaps he knew my reputation with the sword, that had made older men pause ere provoking me; but the sneering laugh with which I accompanied my last words caused him to flush with shame, as I had so intended.

“By heaven, no!” he burst out. “If you are bent on being killed, captain, I will oblige you. And you others, stand back. I have already an account to settle with this gentleman.”

And as, obedient to his command, they drew back a little on either side, leaving us a clearer space to wield our weapons, he sprang impetuously forward, and our blades clashed together. Yet scarcely had we exchanged a dozen passes ere my lady’s voice rang high above the music of our swords.

“Do not kill him! do not kill him!” she cried.

Whether it was that her sudden appearance within the circle, or that the events of the night had unstrung my nerves and robbed my hand of its cunning, I do not know. But on a sudden my sword wavered, and in that brief instant my opponent’s blade slipped within my guard and his point pierced my left breast. Yet still for a moment I did not fall. I staggered, indeed, against the wall, but my brain was so clear that the whole scene was printed indelibly upon my memory. The moonlight falling upon the ring of encircling faces, the young baronet staring stupidly at his encrimsoned blade, scarce crediting his victory, and, lastly, my lady’s white, stricken face, as, wide-eyed, she gazed at the fast reddening circle on my breast.

Suddenly the silence was broken by the sharp click of her fan as it fell upon the gravel walk.

“Madam,” I said huskily, taking two steps toward her, with earth and sky rocking in one red mist before my eyes, “you have dropped your fan; permit me to restore it to you.” And I fell heavily at her feet.