OF WHAT BEFELL ON THE TERRACE


IT was dark when my senses deserted me; it was still dark when they returned amidst the accompanying roar of the battlefield. I was stretched at full length upon the ground, pressed down by some heavy weight that rendered me powerless of moving hand or foot. Dimly through the black pall of smoke that enveloped me I thought that I recognised the outline of my old charger Gustavus, who had borne me in safety through the perils of many a stricken field, to meet his death at last amidst the rout of Teneffe. So it was Teneffe then! And yonder, where the fire flashed redly, that was the village itself, fired by the Dutch in that last charge in which a spent cannon-ball had struck me down. Aye, I could see them now--a dense mass of men, fighting, struggling, swaying to and fro amidst the blazing ruins of the hamlet. More, I could see Conde’s veterans--victors of Naerden, Rhimberg and the Rhine, recoiling before the berghers and traders of the Netherlands. Nearer to me, upon an eminence some five hundred paces distant, a battery of French artillery added their iron tongues to the increasing roar of the field. Faintly, whenever the smoke drifted, I could see the gunners working madly at their pieces; but as the retreat of their comrades before William’s stolid infantry developed rapidly into a rout, the guns ceased firing one by one, and limbering up, they advanced at a gallop upon the spot where--totally incapable of movement--I lay full in their path.

I struggled vainly to rise--a mountain seemed to press me down. I strove to cry out, but no sound came from my parched lips. Nearer and nearer, swifter and swifter, they swept down upon me, in one fierce tempest of maddened horses and shouting men, with the great guns swaying behind them. Now, so close were they, that I could see the wild, straining eyes of the horses and the blackened faces of the gunners, who lashed their teams to frenzy. Now with a trembling of the ground beneath me--a nightmare of blood-red beasts and giant riders--they were upon me, over me. With a despairing cry I flung out my arm and awoke to a full consciousness of my surroundings.

I drew a deep breath and lay for a time gazing up at the ceiling overhead, until the noises in my head gradually subsided, and I became conscious of a fierce throbbing in my left shoulder, that most effectually brought back the events of the previous day to my memory. Glancing downwards, I saw that my arm was supported in a sling upon my breast. At that I rose with an effort upon my right elbow and, despite the feeling of faintness that oppressed me, took a rapid survey of my surroundings. Clad only in my shirt and breeches, I lay upon a bed of rugs in a room that I had never previously seen. In what part of the manor it was situated I could not form a guess, but from its appearance I judged that it was used for little else than a lumber room. Beside my couch my eyes lighted upon a tray, whereon was set a flask of spirits, put ready there, I opined, ’gainst my awaking. I reached for the flask and drank deeply of its contents. It was cognac--in quality the best--and with the generous spirit I felt my strength return to me and the life blood course swifter through my veins. Presently I staggered to my feet and moved somewhat unsteadily in the direction of the window. It was guarded by three massive iron bars let into the solid masonry, and of such a thickness as to effectually preclude all possibility of escape in that direction. My prison was in the left wing of the house, for below me was the stable yard, with the stables themselves directly facing me. No one was about, so that taking this fact, together with the coolness of the morning air into consideration, I judged that the hour was yet early. Ah, but it was good to breathe the fresh sea breeze into one’s lungs, to watch the sunlight dancing in the courtyard, and the white, fleecy clouds chasing each other overhead.

I next turned my attention to the wound upon my shoulder, striving in so far as I was able to ascertain the exact extent of injury inflicted. To my surprise and gratification, upon slipping my arm from the sling which supported it, I found that I could move it with tolerable freedom, and with no very great addition to the pain that I already endured.

Presently I made the discovery that the sling itself belonged to me--was, in fact, no other than the very scarf which I had bound around my lady’s wrist. Up till that moment I had been so absorbed in examining my prison, that I had lost all recollection of the means which had deprived me for the time being of my liberty. But now at the sight of this scarf, bringing back in a flood of memory all my lady’s treachery and my own humiliation, I fell into so fierce a rage as surely never woman roused in man before.

In a sudden access of unreasoning passion I tore the silken sling from around my neck and ground it savagely beneath my heel. Oh, for one hour of liberty! One hour of revenge upon this woman who had beguiled me to my undoing! One hour to break that haughty spirit--to bend, to crush, to bring her grovelling upon her knees for pity! Pity? If that the time should ever come that I could repay her for the present shame I felt by striking her through those she loved, then let her not look for any pity at the hands of the man whom she had wronged, for by all I held most sacred I would not spare her!

After awhile, oppressed by a feeling that I could not breathe, I moved again to the window, that the cool sea breeze might play upon my burning forehead.

“Good-day to you, general,” said a mocking voice. “Will your lordship be pleased to require your horse this morning?” I glanced swiftly down.

Below me in the courtyard was the youth Martin, and behind him the grinning faces of the other two stable hands. All three carried old-fashioned muskets in their hands, with more or less rusty swords strapped to their waists. Evidently my prison was well guarded.

I stepped hastily back from the casement, yet not so quickly but that I caught the jeering laugh with which the words were accompanied. It was this laugh more than the insolence of the words themselves that stung me once more to sudden rage; and I fell to pacing the floor in a frenzy of impotent passion.

Doubtless my lady had taken a pleasure in relating to all within the house the manner in which the poor dupe had fallen into her snare--aye, and had laughed--laughed with them over my discomfiture! The latter thought was maddening.

I stopped in my walk, and in order to seek any distraction rather than to dwell further upon my shame, I set to work in feverish haste to examine the lumber that the room contained, in the hope that I might discover some weapon with which to arm myself. Though to what purpose, seeing that I had no strength to use it, even if I had stumbled upon that which I sought, I did not stop to reason. But there was no weapon of any description to be found. Books there were in plenty, old tapestry and pictures, china and odd-looking furniture, in shape such as I had never previously seen, and all bearing the same mark of extreme age.

Presently I desisted from my search and again peered cautiously out of the window. The two louts still lingered in the doorway of the stable opposite, but the youth Martin had disappeared. Even as I stood watching the men before me somewhere within the house a door banged too loudly, and there came the sound of footsteps nearing the room in which I was confined. At that I reseated myself upon the chest and strove to regain my ordinary composure, for I was determined that my gaolers should not be witnesses of how deeply I felt the shame of my present position. The footsteps ceased in the passage without, a key was thrust into the lock, and a moment later the heavy door swung open, disclosing the figure of the steward.

“You are to follow me,” he growled, with a sour smile.

“Whither?” I asked curtly.

“That you will soon know,” he replied, with all his old hatred of me looking out of his eyes. “Come--no more words.”

“I will know now, or I do not stir from this room,” I said stubbornly. “Hark you, Master Steward, I have asked you a civil question and I await your answer.”

“What if I refuse?” he growled. “I have it in my power to compel you.”

“You may use force if it so please you,” I answered boldly, snatching up the stool upon which I had been sitting.

“But in that case I warn you there will be more than one head broken ere I am removed.”

For a few moments we faced each other in silence, and he half turned, as though he was about to summon assistance, but apparently he thought better of it, or my resolute attitude daunted him, for again he hesitated.

“Very well, if you must know,” he said with a grim smile, “to my lady, then.”

“Ah!” was all I answered, though I felt my heart quicken.

“And now I hope you are satisfied,” he continued, his former insolent manner returning. “So come, let us have no further waste of time.”

“What, as I am?” I cried quickly, remembering on a sudden the scantiness of my attire. Even the shirt I wore had been partly cut away to enable them to dress my wound. “Where is my uniform, you rascal?”

“Burnt!” he answered sneeringly. “And I have no orders to play the part of tailor.”

“To the devil with your orders!” I cried in a rage. “Get me some clothes, fool! Would you have me appear before ladies in this guise?”

Still for a moment he hesitated, then, “Wait,” he said briefly. And he went out, locking the heavy door behind him. When the last sound of his footsteps had died away, I commenced to pace the floor in some agitation. So I was to see my lady then? In good sooth I had need of all my composure to face the coming interview. Not for the world would I have her see that any words of hers had power to move me. Not for the world would I give her cause to triumph at my humiliation. Rapidly I shaped out in my own mind a course of conduct to pursue and had reduced my face to a state of impassiveness ere, after the lapse of some ten minutes, the steward’s returning footsteps again became audible.

This time he carried a bundle in his hand, which he flung as carelessly at my feet as one might fling a bone to some stray cur.

I turned it over with my foot. It was a coat of coarse brown cloth such as any groom might wear, and reeked indeed most vilely of the stable.

“Pah!” I said in disgust. “Is this the best you can find me, man?”

“Best?” he cried impatiently. “Aye, and too good at that, since it comes from the back of an honest man. But make your choice and quickly! Either you come of your own accord or we will drag you there. Time presses. Which is it to be?”

I saw that the knave would keep his word, and now that I knew my destination I was in no mind to appear before my lady in so undignified a fashion. I bade him sharply then to hold his peace and to assist me in donning the coat--of which a closer inspection lent but an increase to the repugnance I felt in wearing. This, indeed, seeing that it was impossible owing to my wound that I could accomplish of myself, he presently did, though with much muttering the while, of which I took no heed.

Even then I was forced to again resume my sling and to fasten the one empty sleeve upon my breast, for I found that I could not yet force my arm within it, owing to the latter’s stiffness. This done, I turned to the steward.

“I am ready,” I said curtly. “Lead on, my friend.”

He looked at me with a cunning smile. “Not so fast,” he answered, stepping quickly into the passage and drawing a pistol from his breast. “You will go first, if you please; and play me no tricks, for I am armed, as you see, and I have a good memory.”

In truth, I saw that the knave would only be too glad to revenge himself upon me, so I shrugged my shoulders indifferently and turned along the passage in the direction he indicated.

In this order we proceeded, then, until we reached the entrance hall. Yet still the lout behind me pointed forward, and we passed out of the main door, and so into the open air.

But it was only when I was descending the steps that I fully realised the scene, and the meaning of the shouts that I had heard became plain to me. For on my right, at the end of the terrace, where three broad steps led down on to the grassland bordering the main avenue, was a little group of some half dozen persons, among whom my eyes lighted almost immediately upon the tall figure of my lady.

Below them, upon the grass, the whole of the villagers, men, women and children, seemed to have gathered; and a clamour of derisive shouts greeted my appearance.

Beyond bestowing one look of contempt upon them I took no heed, but calling all my fortitude to my aid, with head erect and with a firm step I passed along the terrace to where my lady awaited me.

As I approached nearer I scanned the persons before me more closely. With some at least I was already acquainted. There was Mistress Grace, who eyed me, I thought, with a glance that bespoke more of pity for my forlorn condition than of triumph at the successful issue of their enterprise. Near to her was my late adversary, the young Sir Rupert Courtenay, and three or four of the neighbouring gentry, all of whom I knew to be of the Jacobite persuasion; while at the head of the steps, with a grim smile upon his face, stood the stalwart figure of Sampson Dare. But it was with more curiosity that I gazed upon the two men with whom my lady herself was conversing. They were seated at a small table, a bottle and glasses before them, and a more villainous pair of rogues it has seldom been my lot to set eyes upon. He who seemed to be the spokesman was dressed in a voluminous skirted coat of blue, adorned here and there with tarnished bold braid. Beneath this was a faded silken vest, and I caught a glimpse of a brace of pistols garnishing the broad belt at his waist. His legs, like those of his companion, were encased in high sea-boots that reached all but to his thigh, and upon his head was an old-fashioned three-cornered hat. In years he might have been anything from forty to sixty, but his brown mahogany face was so scarred and wrinkled that it gave no clear indication as to his age. That he was a seaman I saw at a glance, and my mind instantly reverted to the vessel I had seen in the bay. His companion was a tall, gaunt man, dressed in a coarse blue jerkin and with a red cotton cap upon his head. For the rest, both these worthies wore heavy gold earrings and carried long swords at their sides. Master and mate I took them to be, and as it subsequently proved, my surmise was correct.

At length I came to a halt, I caught the words which he of the blue coat was addressing to my lady. “No, no,” he was saying in a harsh voice that was well in keeping with his whole appearance, “have no fear on that score, mistress. They shall be treated like gentlemen. Curse me! like gentlemen. No more humane a man than I am ever set sail from Bristol port, as Silas Ball here will tell you.”

Here he looked across at the mate, who grinned broadly, as at some excellent jest--a jest which at the time I failed to comprehend, though afterwards I came to experience more of the former gentleman’s humanity.

“Given a fair wind, in two days’ time they will be---- Is this the man?” he added abruptly, setting down his half-emptied glass and bending his brows upon me.

Up till now my lady had been standing with her back to me, but at these words she turned, and we were face to face. For it may be twenty seconds we stood thus, my lady proud and cold, I with a tumult of conflicting emotions in my breast, in which a rapidly rising rage against her treachery was the more predominant. At once the clamour around us was stilled into the silence of a great expectancy.

“This is the man, Captain Barclay,” my lady said quietly. Then, with her eyes still upon mine, she added: “I trust, sir, that your wound is on a fair way towards recovery?”

“Madam,” I answered bitterly, striving to control the passion in my voice, “awhile ago you accused me of hypocrisy in that I pitied you. I think that the accusation might well be reversed. You have openly rebelled against the government, you have defied the royal authority, and, for all that I am aware, have slain the troopers under my command, and, lastly, you have deprived me, a king’s officer, of my liberty by such base trickery as only the heart of a woman could conceive. You should have been an actress, madam, had fate not willed you to be born a lady. I congratulate you. Satan himself might take lessons from you in deceit!” For a moment she did not speak, and I saw the colour deepen in her face.

“I fought you with a woman’s weapons,” she answered coldly--“your manly wit against my woman’s beauty. If I succeeded, you have but yourself to blame.”

“You say true, madam,” I cried hotly. “For falsehood, flattery and guile--those are, indeed, a woman’s weapons--not a gentleman’s!”

“Then by your own words, sir,” she replied icily, “you do but prove the truth of my assertion.”

“As to the sequel of your scheme, madam,” I continued, “the shame of it rests rather in success than failure. To your own conscience I leave it to justify your conduct. But I have little doubt that long practice has rendered your ladyship proficient in the art of deception to which I fell a victim.”

She threw back her proud head and gazed at me with flashing eyes. “And do you imagine, sir, even for a moment, that the part I degraded myself into playing was an easy one!” she replied scornfully. “To expose myself to the shame of your approval?”

“No, madam,” I answered sternly. “There you are wrong. For a man’s honest admiration, however humble his station in life, carries no shame to the woman who inspires it--were she the highest in the land.”

“Oh, sir,” she cried ironically, “spare me your sophistry; for honesty coupled with your name is too incongruous. And let me take this opportunity of informing you that thanks to your credulity the army of France, so long delayed, may land in safety on our shores to-night; and thus, sir, indirectly, you have hastened the first step that restores the Stuart to the throne.”

Then raising her voice so that all might hear: “God save King James!” she cried clearly; and the cry was enthusiastically caught up both by the gentlemen upon the terrace and the waiting crowd below.

“And you tell me this, madam?” I said in a choked voice when the clamour had died away.

She turned upon me with a scornful smile. “If you think that you can make use of the information, sir, you are welcome to do so,” she replied. “But I think--and these gentlemen will bear me witness--that your present position is scarcely to be envied.” And she mocked me. Standing there in the pride of her power and her beauty she mocked me--I, a weak and wounded prisoner!

“And you are wounded, too,” she continued pitilessly, “and by one scarce more than a boy--a boy!” she added with intense scorn. “I think if I remember right, sir, that you offered me the service of your sword. When I require such service from any man on my behalf, it shall be from one who has the wit and strength--aye, and skill enough to handle it.”

I stood trembling and dumb before her, gazing from one to the other of the ruthless, mocking faces around me, and back again to my lady’s scornful countenance. Yet was there no real cause for me to wonder at her present mood; for deep down in the heart of every woman--aye, even in the very best of them, there is an innate well of cruelty, a delight in inflicting pain upon our sex, which, it may be, is engendered by their physical inferiority. It was at this moment that, as with a sense of utter loneliness I faced my encircling enemies, a sudden faintness seized me. I know not whether it was due unto my wound, or whether all that I had passed through had overtaxed my strength, but I staggered back against the terrace wall. Yet even in that moment I was not so far unconscious but that I heard an exclamation of pity escape the lips of Mistress Grace.

“Madam,” I gasped hoarsely--I could bear no more--“let us end this. Kill me if you will, but for God’s sake end this!”

“You are right, sir,” she answered quickly. “I will end it, and spare myself the further insult of your ‘honest admiration.’ There are depths below depths of infamy and shame. But if admiration is based upon kindred qualities of spirit, I can conceive no greater degradation than to be the object of your passion.” Yet as she spoke I saw that the colour had forsaken her face and she pressed her hand against her side, as if in sudden pain. Aye, others saw it too, for, “Lettice, you are ill!” her sister cried, hastening to her assistance. But my lady put her aside.

“No, no,” she cried passionately. “It is nothing--nothing! Is not this the hour of my triumph? And shall I not take it? Shall I not----” She broke off abruptly with a slight shudder, then with a sudden change of manner she ran to the terrace wall and beckoned to the expectant crowd below.

“Look there,” she cried fiercely, flinging out her arm towards me. “There is the man before whom for many days we have cowered and trembled, who has held our safety and our lives in the hollow of his hand; there is the man who has called himself our master--our master--yours and mine--mine! Look well upon him now!”

A fierce shout answered her words and the crowd pressed forward to the foot of the steps with menacing cries and curses, in which the voices of the women joined the loudest.

“Give him to us!” a voice shouted, and the cry was quickly caught up and repeated. “Aye, give him to us! To the cliffs with him!”

“To the cliffs, say you?” cried a wild-eyed woman shrilly, darting up the steps and endeavouring to push her way past Sampson Dare. “To the gallows with him! ’Twas such as he that hung my boy to the sign-post of the inn for following King Monmouth! Aye, and played their drums the while to drown his dying cries! This for you--butcher!” She flung a clod of earth that struck me full in the face, and above the fierce shout of approval that greeted her words, mingled with those of “butcher!” and “to the sign-post with him!” I heard my lady give a hard, cruel laugh at my discomfiture. Stung more by this than all the indignities heaped upon me, I rallied all my strength and faced them squarely at the head of the steps.

“Peace, you hounds,” I cried sternly. “You who yelp so loudly now for James would, at a turn of Fortune’s wheel, bark louder still--for William! Not with such as you have I to deal. But for you, madam!” I cried hoarsely, turning to my lady, who stood pale and erect, her eyes shining with defiance and a light I could not read--“you, who knowing better, lure these senseless hinds to ruin with a cunning worthy of yourself and of your cause--to you, I say, the debt between us is no light one. Look to yourself in the day that I repay you for this morning’s work!”

In the vehemence of my passion my wound reopened, and with the world receding from my fading vision I fell back senseless in the arms of Sampson Dare.