OF THE GENTLEMAN ABOARD THE GOOD SHIP “PRIDE OF DEVON”


FOR exactly how long my swoon lasted, to this day I can but hazard a vague conjecture. But with returning consciousness I found myself lying upon a heap of straw in the stable I have before mentioned, with the steward bending over me busily engaged in re-bandaging my wound. Beyond him, near to the doorway, lounged Sampson Dare, and in the yard without I caught a glimpse of three or four servants belonging to the manor, all of them fully armed, and of the youth Martin holding the bridle of my own impatient sorrel.

“So, so,” said the steward grimly, upon seeing me open my eyes. “King William is spared the mourning for a valiant servant.”

“And the devil has lost his own--as yet,” added Sampson Dare with a grin.

I closed my eyes for awhile and lay silent; for the sunlight without dazzled me, and I was conscious, moreover, of a feeling of intense weakness, by which I imagined that I must have lost a quantity of blood--which was, indeed, the case.

When the man beside me had completed his task, even to replacing my arm within its former sling, all of which, to his credit be it said, he accomplished with no undue harshness, he thrust a flask of spirits in my hand and bade me curtly, “Drink.”

In this, indeed, I was the more ready to obey him, since not only was I afflicted with an intolerable thirst, but also the events of the past few hours recurred swiftly to my memory, and I was minded to uphold my dignity and conceal the weakness that I really felt in the presence of the men before me. Deeply, therefore, I quaffed of the cognac which the flask contained, drinking in with it an increased vitality and such returning strength that presently I was enabled to stagger to my feet.

“That is better,” said the steward, nodding approvingly, as I was fain to lean for a moment or two longer against the wall to recover from the sudden faintness which the effort had entailed; “for the day wears on apace, and ’tis time we should be moving.”

“Whither?” I gasped hoarsely, glancing from his face to that of Sampson Dare.

“Ah, you will see time enough,” the latter made answer. “A pleasant journey to you, with good company!” and he grinned broadly.

“Come, come, we waste time,” said the steward impatiently, at the same time beckoning to Martin to bring my horse nearer. “Can you mount?” he added, turning abruptly to me.

At that I rallied all my strength, and disregarding his proffered arm, I stepped--somewhat unsteadily, I will admit--through the open doorway to the sorrel’s side, who turned his head at my appearance and whinnied softly in gentle recognition. But the sight of the animal was as if I had found an old friend, and it was with a renewal of hope that with Sampson Dare’s assistance I climbed heavily into the saddle. Yet if some wild scheme of escaping had for a moment crossed my mind it was speedily doomed to be disappointed; for, with the steward leading the sorrel by the bridle and with the other men forming in a little cluster around me, I was forced to admit to myself, however reluctantly, that any idea of regaining my liberty was for the present at least impracticable.

Nay, more, as my eyes, travelling from face to face of the group around me, encountered those of Sampson Dare, as if reading my thoughts, he significantly patted a long barrelled pistol in his hand. No, the odds were too heavy against me in my wounded state, and so, with a slight shrug, I resigned myself to waiting for what should follow.

In this order, then, we left the stables behind us and moved slowly towards the entrance gates of the manor. Upon turning the corner of the house, we came once more in full view of the terrace and of the crowd that still gathered thickly upon the grass below. Eagerly I looked towards the scene of my late humiliation.

The gentlemen still lingered upon the terrace and the two seafaring men awaited our appearance at the foot of the steps and immediately made their way towards us; but of my lady herself or of her sister I could see nothing. And at this I was greatly relieved, for of a surety I had not courage enough left to me to sustain with dignity another interview such as that through which I had lately passed.

As for the waiting crowd, doubtless it would have gone hard with me at their hands had I not had the escort of Sampson Dare and the other stout rogues by my side for my protection; or it may be that my lady had herself issued stringent orders as to my safe conduct; for though upon catching sight of me they immediately thronged around us, yet they contented themselves with calling down curses upon me, and beyond this, offered no violent opposition to our progress. Indeed, they came no farther with us than the gates of the manor, and upon turning into the road, we were left to proceed on our way alone, save for the company of the two seamen who followed close upon our heels, ever and anon breaking out into a lusty chorus, which they sang at the full strength of voices, rendered not too steady by the spirits they had been freely imbibing. ’Twas a doggerel verse at best, nathless possessing a jingle that even in the midst of the anxiety I felt as to my position persistently forced itself upon my memory:

  “Then a fig for a landsman’s life, my lads--     And a cheer for the Spanish Main!   With the still lagoons and the bright doubloons--   And the black-eyed maids of Spain, my lads!     Oho, for the maids of Spain!”

To this accompaniment we arrived in no long time at the village, and passing slowly down the deserted street, wended our way to the little stone jetty that lay behind the court-house; that is, all save the two worthies who had followed us, who stopped to further refresh themselves at the inn.

Swiftly I glanced seawards. Less than a mile off shore lay the mysterious vessel I had seen from the cliffs; and the sight confirmed the suspicions I already had in my mind as to my further destination. Moreover, as, obedient to a curt command from Sampson Dare, I slowly dismounted on the pier, I took occasion of the steward to inquire whither we were bound.

For a moment he hesitated, as if debating with himself whether he should satisfy my curiosity; but apparently concluding it could do not harm, his face relaxed into a grim smile.

“To France,” he replied briefly.

“France?” I cried, unable under the sudden surprise to conceal the dismay his words caused me.

“Aye,” he answered sourly, enjoying my too evident confusion. “The prospect does not please you? Well, I think that the galleys will more than counterbalance this.” And he lightly touched his neck.

I would have questioned him still further but that the captain and the mate arrived at this moment upon the jetty just as a boat put off from the vessel’s side and made rapidly for the spot where we were standing. But at sight of the boat, or rather I supposed, finding no boat ready waiting for us, the captain, who I saw at a glance was decidedly the worse for liquor, broke out into a string of horrid curses, which ceased only for lack of breath. With face inflamed and gait unsteady he advanced to the end of the jetty and awaited its nearer approach.

“You rogues!” he roared, as the object of his rage came alongside and the two evil-looking faces of the seamen who manned it were raised to his. “You scum! You devil-spawn! You must return to the ship without orders, must ye! And keep your betters waiting, must ye!--Burn my body! but I’ll teach ye discipline when I get aboard!”

Then in a fresh access of drunken fury he turned suddenly upon me, and drawing a pistol from his belt waved it towards the waiting boat below. “Get in, you dog!” he shouted brutally. I glanced at the faces of the men around me. In no one of them did I see aught but satisfaction at my departure. So, with the prospect of escape at present receding, I shrugged my shoulders lightly, and disdaining further speech of them, I seated myself in the bow of the boat.

Scarcely had I ensconced myself ere the captain and the mate took their places in the stern, the captain still with the pistol upon his knees.

“Shove off and be damned to ye!” he roared. “And put your backs to it if you would not wish a bullet in ye!”

Obedient to his command, the men bent to their oars in sullen silence--a silence all too plainly born of fear--and we headed for the distant vessel--and a prison.

As the distance between the boat and the shore behind us gradually increased I took my last look of Cleeve. The evening was fast drawing on and already the cloud shadows lay in darkened patches upon the green slopes of Cleevesborough, though all around us the sea shimmered golden in the glory of the sinking sun. Behind us, the little group of figures upon the jetty still lingered, staring after us--the sorrel in their midst. And so still was the evening air that even at that distance their voices came plainly to my ears across the widening water. Away to the right, above the dark woods that crowned the rugged cliffs, I caught sight of the tall chimneys of the manor that had proved so sorry a grave to my ambitions. Bitter were my thoughts as I gazed upon it. A week ago had seen me in the plenitude of power--master of the manor and of all beneath its roof. Now I sat in the gathering night shadows--a helpless, dishonoured prisoner, every stroke of the oars speeding me nearer to France and to the galleys. And the cause of it all--a woman!

All this time the captain in the stern had not been silent--now cursing at the seamen for their tardiness, anon breaking out into snatches of the song I had before heard:

  “And the black-eyed maids of Spain, my lads!   Oho! for the maids of Spain!”

Presently I turned my attention to the vessel we were rapidly approaching. Certainly the appearance of the captain and the crew were not prepossessing, and confirmed me in the opinion that she was a privateer,--most likely hailing from Bristol--one of those free lances of the ocean fitted out by wealthy Jacobites to assist the cause of James; but which--such was the unsettled state of the times--preyed upon all merchant shipping alike with strict impartiality.

The ship proved to be a larger craft upon nearer approach than I had first imagined. She lay motionless upon the water, stern on towards us, and her tapering spars and tracery of ropes stood darkly out against the evening sky. As we swept round to larboard, above the cabin window in her stern I saw her name, _The Scourge_. At the same time I caught sight of a score or more of villainous faces gazing at us from above the bulwarks of her low, black hull, from which, here and there, the frowning muzzles of her guns protruded. But small time had I for speculation upon her character, for no sooner were we alongside--and it was not without considerable difficulty that I gained the deck--than the captain turned fiercely upon the first of the two sailors who had followed us aboard.

“That for disobeying orders, you dog!” he cried, snatching a pistol from his belt and striking the fellow so shrewd a blow with the heavy butt that the rogue fell to the deck half stunned.

“Up with ye!” he added, bestowing a brutal kick upon the man’s prostrate body. “No skulking here while Barclay’s in command. Though, curse me! a more humane man than I never left Bristol port!”

More I was not permitted to see or hear, for at a word from the mate, a couple of the ruffians seized me, and forcing me down a narrow companion ladder aft, flung open a door at its foot and thrust me inside with unnecessary violence; and I heard the shooting of the heavy bolts behind them. At first, I could distinguish nothing of my surroundings, but after a few moments, when my eyes had grown accustomed to the gloom, I made out that I was in a small cabin some seven feet square, destitute of all furniture, but with a narrow wooden locker at one end. Such light and air as there was--if light it could be called, which was at best but semi-darkness--came from a narrow slit, six inches high--not more, above the door. As for the heat of the place, ’twas stifling, for be it remembered it was now the very height of summer, and the little air there was below deck stole through the open companion way down which we had come. I raised my hand above me and found that I could touch with ease the massive timbers overhead. Being a tall man, as I have previously stated, I also found that with comparatively little difficulty I could raise my face to the level of the slit above the door. But there was little to reward my curiosity. I could see, indeed, the companion ladder without and a narrow passage to my left running into the gloom, which I conjectured to lead to the cabins astern, but that was all.

I next turned my attention to the door itself. It was of stout timber, far too strong to be broken open by anything short of an axe and fastened, moreover, by the bolts that I had heard drawn. Presently, therefore, I desisted from my inspection, and seating myself upon the locker, I gave myself up to my reflections. The light grew feebler and feebler in the cabin, until at length it died out altogether, and I was left in the darkness to speculate upon the strange adversities of fortune. As for the steward’s threat of the galleys, I swore desperately to myself that such a fate should not be mine, though as yet I could see no glimmer of light as to how I was to accomplish my escape. One thing I had in my favour. The vessel was yet at anchor and remembering the fact of the stillness of the evening air, I thought it unlikely that a breeze would spring up for many hours, so that there was time before me wherein to formulate a plan.

It was not until some two hours later that I saw a light glimmer upon the ceiling of the cabin and heard a heavy step descending the ladder. A moment later the bolts were withdrawn and the mate himself appeared in the doorway. In one hand he carried a lantern, which he held up the better to view me. He was followed by a boy bearing a coarse brown loaf and a pitcher of water. These the latter set upon the boards and withdrew. Yet the mate lingered for a moment, making pretence of waiting to see if I should speak.

“There is your supper,” he said at length, finding that I kept silent.

“’Tis coarse enough fare,” I said abruptly, “and quite in keeping with your lodging.”

“Yet be content,” he answered, “’tis better than that of your men.”

“Ah, they are aboard, then?” I said quickly; for up till now I had been so taken up with considering my own position that I had scarcely given a thought to them.

“In irons,” he answered, grinning. “And you, too, had we another set aboard.”

“Bah!” I replied nonchalantly, concealing the trepidation his words caused me. “There are worse things, my friend, and it is not far to France.”

“Ho, ho, ho!” he chuckled. “To France--no! It is not far to France, as you say.”

Something in the man’s words--in his face--caused me a vague uneasiness.

“Hark you, master mate,” I said sharply. “I am your prisoner; why not be frank with me?--You have been paid to carry us to France, is it not so?”

“What, then?” he replied slowly. “A poor sailorman must live. There’s a market for such stout knaves as you any day--in Algiers!”

And without further word he closed and bolted the door behind him, and I heard his heavy footsteps ascend the ladder, and left me in the darkness. But if I had been anxious to escape before, his last words made me doubly so. All too clearly I understood his meaning. The villains had not scrupled to accept the money paid by my lady or her Jacobite friends for our removal, but were now meditating selling us into a slavery a hundred times worse than death itself, thus making for themselves a double profit. For how long I sat there in the darkness, revolving this and all that had led up to it I do not know. At length, worn out by the excitement and events of the day through which I had passed, I stretched myself upon the hard boards, and with my coat for a pillow fell into a heavy slumber.

For many hours I must have slept the sleep of exhaustion, for the light was glimmering faintly upon the beams overhead when I awoke to a full consciousness of my surroundings. Also I discovered at once that we were at sea, for the vessel was rolling heavily. Overhead I could hear the trampling of feet and the captain’s voice roaring out hoarse commands. But no one came near me, and for hours I waited in solitude revolving a scheme in my brain which every moment took shape more clearly. True it was a chance only, and a forlorn one, yet I could see no other way, and desperate men do not stick at trifles.

The idea then came to me fully at noon, when again the door was unbolted to admit the boy and the tall mate with a repetition of the coarse fare of the preceding night. But it was necessary for the execution of my plan that I should wait for the friendly covering of darkness, so I huddled myself upon the locker and feigned to be overcome by the rolling of the ship. The mate looked at me carelessly.

“Ho, ho, ho!” he cried with a grin. “Hast lost thy sea legs, man? Why, my bully, ’tis a capful of wind this--scarce fit to call a breeze.”

To this I replied with a groan by way of answer, sinking my head more forward that he might not see my face; and with a few ribald jests at my expense he presently left me in solitude.

When the door had again closed I fell to upon the food that they had brought me. Coarse though it was, I had need of all my strength for the task before me. For as it was, in the first place, essential for me to escape from the cabin, I had resolved to attempt a sudden rush when next they should bring me my supper, trusting to luck to find some means of leaving the vessel in the darkness and confusion. ’Twas a madman’s scheme at best, but I dared delay no longer, for every hour carried me farther from the shores of England. Weapon I had none, but I had caught a glimpse of a long knife in the mate’s belt, and could I but get possession of this, I vowed I would not be retaken without a struggle. Also I was handicapped heavily by the wound in my breast, that had stiffened the muscles of my shoulder, leaving me with but the partial use of my left arm. And, again, there was the boy to be reckoned with. But anything was better than to tamely submit to be sold into slavery, and hope of liberty is a great factor in renewing strength and courage.

Moreover, I reflected, if what my lady had said was true, the safety of England might lie in my hands.

How long the hours seemed to me until the light began to fade in the cabin can well be imagined; but gradually it grew less and less, and was I deceived, or was it really a thin mist that came floating down the hatchway and penetrated to my prison cell? My heart gave a great leap--’twas sure a heaven sent boon to cloak my escape. And ere the light had quite faded a new inspiration came to me. I was still wearing my heavy military boots that reached above my knee, although my spurs had been removed, belike by one of the servants at the manor. I now drew these off that I might be the lighter upon my feet and also the more silent, and the thought came to me that one of them would form no bad missile with which to preface my attack. Nay, I trusted that the first surprise would be so great that I should secure the knife with but little difficulty and then--well, liberty is dear to the heart of every man. So I waited alone in the darkness with every nerve strung for the coming encounter, listening to the creaking of the ship’s timbers and the faint shouts of command from the deck overhead. And at last there came a gleam of light above the doorway, and I heard the mate’s step upon the ladder. Once he slipped ere he reached the bottom and I heard him curse loudly.

I rose at that, and with the boot in my hand awaited the opening of the door. But Fortune, that had of late played me so many scurvy tricks, was surely anxious to make amends to me that night, for upon the bolts being withdrawn, the door swung slowly open and disclosed the figure of the mate only. He had set the lantern upon the floor at his feet and in his left hand carried my coarse night fare. Without troubling to raise the light so as to satisfy himself as to my condition, he took two steps into the cabin and stooped to place the food upon the floor. But that was his undoing; for hastily changing my original intention, as the rogue bent down I swung the boot aloft, and with all the strength of arm and body brought down the heavy heel upon his head. Without cry or groan he flung his arms wide and fell an inert heap at my feet. In a moment I had thrown myself upon him--my hands upon his throat. But there was little need for me to exert any pressure there, the fellow lay as motionless as a log. And when, a moment later, I released my grip and slightly raised his head, it fell again with a dull thud upon the boards. Not till then did I rise to my feet, my first care being to secure the lantern, and with this in my hand I re-entered the cabin and carefully closed the door behind me. Then I again bent over my prisoner. A very brief examination sufficed to assure me that the fellow was but stunned; and securing his knife, I bound his arms firmly behind his back with his own belt; and with a strip torn from the sleeve of his shirt and his red cap I made an effectual gag. This done, I propped him against the locker. Then blowing out the lantern, I crept from the cabin. Once outside in the passage, I shot the heavy bolts behind me and stood still for a moment listening.

Not a sound came to show that the mate’s fall had been heard from the deck, though I could hear voices raised as though in altercation, and I knew that it would not be long before his absence was discovered. ’Twas almost dark where I stood, at the foot of the ladder, clutching the knife in my hand, every nerve in my body braced to meet whatever should befall. Overhead, a lighter patch in the gloom indicated the hatchway. As my eyes grew more accustomed to my surroundings, I made out that the only other exit was by way of the narrow passage on my left, that led, I felt assured, to the cabin astern. Yet I was reluctant to abandon my men without making some effort to liberate them, even though, from what the mate had said, I knew them to be in irons somewhere in the forepart of the ship. I should, indeed, have ventured upon some desperate scheme for their release--which would assuredly have led to my own undoing--nay, I had already ascended the ladder, and my head was all but on a level with the deck--enough so, indeed, to show me that a thin damp mist wrapped the ship in its embrace, so that of the masts and spars above little was discernible--when on a sudden from the deck above came the hoarse voice of Captain Barclay.

“Forward there!” he roared. “Where is the mate? Send him aft, one o’ ye!”

’Twas a question of minutes only ere his plight was discovered. I turned on the instant, and darting down the ladder, sped swiftly along the narrow passage opposite, to where a faint light shone from beneath a door at the farther end. I did not stop to consider what might lie behind it, but taking a firmer grip of the knife, I flung open the door. A single glance showed me the cabin was empty. Swiftly I closed the door and shot the heavy bolt that fastened it, then glanced quickly around me.



A single oil lamp swung from a beam in the centre, faintly illuminating the interior. It shone upon the small square table immediately below it, littered with the remains of a meal, and upon a few articles of clothing, tossed carelessly upon the sleeping bunk, as well as upon a few old-fashioned pistols and hangers. But ’twas to the window that I turned my attention, flinging it open and gazing out into the night. One quick glance I gave, then an exclamation of thankfulness rose to my lips. It was, indeed, the stern cabin of the ship, and the light shone out upon a white wall of vapour; for the sea fog was thickening fast. But it was not that only that had fired me with hope; ’twas the sight of a rope cleaving the mist; and peering down, I made out the dim outline of a boat towing astern.

On a sudden, as I leaned far out of the window and grasped the rope with both hands, the deep voice of the man at the helm above me broke out into the song I knew so well:

  “With the still lagoons and the bright doubloons--   And the black-eyed maids of Spain, my lads!     Oho! for the maids of Spain!”

Then after a pause: “Curse this mist!” I heard him mutter. And precisely at this moment came a thundering knock upon the cabin door behind me and a gruff voice calling upon the mate to open.

’Twas no time to hesitate; at the risk of being seen by the helmsman above me--at the risk of my wound reopening--I launched myself out upon my frail support and let myself down into the darkness.

It seemed an eternity ere my feet touched the bow of the boat below, but once I had clambered aboard a few strokes of my knife served to sever the rope, and a moment later the light in the cabin of the _Scourge_ disappeared into the fog, leaving me alone upon the waste of waters. Not till then did I seize the oars, and pulling the boat’s head round commence to row gently in the opposite direction to that which the vessel had taken.

Blacker and blacker closed the night around me, until I could scarcely see the full length of the boat. Presently the mist changed into rain, that grew ever in volume until I was soon drenched to the skin. In this condition, worn out and shivering in my wet clothes, I continued for many hours, until gradually a numbness began to steal over me. In vain I struggled against it. Slowly it grew upon me despite my efforts, until at length, careless of what fate might befall me, I stretched myself in the bottom of the boat and lapsed into unconsciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Boat ahoy!”

The cry came pealing across the water and was still ringing in my ears when my scattered senses returned to me. I raised my head above the thwart and gazed about me, as yet but half awakened. Darkness had given place to a grey and misty dawn and the rain had ceased to fall. But almost immediately my eyes fell upon that which effectually aroused me.

At a short distance away a small brig lay to upon the water, a dozen curious faces looking down upon me from the low bulwarks. Upon the raised poop astern two men were standing, gazing earnestly in my direction. One was short and thick set, with sailor written plainly upon his weather-beaten countenance. The other was to all appearance a gentleman, though his tall figure was concealed by a long riding coat; and I could see little of his face beneath his richly laced hat. ’Twas the shorter of the two who had hailed me.

“Ahoy!” he cried again in stentorian tones. “Can ye row aboard?”

At that I shouted back an assent; though exhaustion had so wrought upon me that my voice was strangely weak; and again betaking myself to the oars, I gained at length the vessel’s side, where a dozen friendly hands assisted me aboard. The tall gentleman had disappeared from the poop, but his companion, whom I took to be the master of the ship, came forward to receive me. He quickly cut short my few stammered expressions of gratitude. “Presently, presently!” he said, eyeing me closely. “Why, y’are wet to the skin, man, and fit subject for an ague. Here,” he cried, beckoning to two of the seamen standing near, “take him below and rig him out amongst ye! No, no,” he continued not unkindly, seeing that I was about to speak, “y’are on my ship, man, and needs must obey orders! Afterwards you may tell your tale.” And he turned upon his heel.

I said no more, but followed the seamen down into the forecastle, where, after receiving a somewhat motley change of garments, together with a stiff pannikin of cognac, I felt little the worse for my night’s adventure. From the seamen themselves I could gain but little information, save that the brig was the _Pride of Devon_, three days out from Kinsale, and bound for Southampton, and that she had been considerably delayed by the thick fog prevailing the previous day. Upon all other subjects they were strangely reticent, so that I presently gave up questioning them and signified my readiness to accompany them on deck.

On arriving there I saw the figure of the master awaiting me at the foot of the poop ladder; but to my astonishment, upon my approaching he laid a finger upon his lips, and advancing to the door of a cabin, which I had not noticed beneath the poop, he threw it open and signed to me to enter.

I did so, wondering.

’Twas a small room, yet somewhat larger than the size of the brig itself promised. In the centre was a table, upon which a repast was already spread; and at this table was seated the gentleman I had previously seen.

He rose at my entrance and made me a courtly bow; then for a moment we gazed at each other in silence. He was, I think, the handsomest man I have ever seen--with regular features and fair moustache matching in colour with his court peruke. He had laid aside his hat, though I noted with surprise that he still wore his plain dark riding coat tightly buttoned, concealing all of his dress beneath save a pair of spurred riding boots. Of fully my own height, he may have been somewhat older in years; but it was rather the lofty look of mingled pride and command upon his face that caught and rivetted the eye. Here was a born leader of men I told myself, one accustomed to exact obedience, and possessing a fiery and indomitable will. No poverty of dress could conceal the latent power suppressed within, or the grace of movement that spoke equally of noble birth.

“Do I address the owner of this vessel?” I said bluntly. For a moment I thought that a faint smile flickered upon his face.

“For the present at least, sir,” he answered quietly, “I think that I may safely claim that title.”

“Then permit me to tender you my sincere thanks for your timely assistance, sir,” I replied.

He raised his hand deprecatingly.

“Nay, ’tis unnecessary,” he replied. “Important as time is to me at present, humanity would forbid me deserting a fellow-being in such distress, and,” he added, with a piercing glance, “if I mistake not, a fellow-soldier.”

“Of some little experience,” I answered proudly.

“Why, then,” he replied, smiling, “I was about to break my fast, sir, when your boat was sighted. Permit me to play the part of host, and we will fight the battles of the world together.” And he waived me courteously to a seat.

I bowed in acceptance, and sat down to the table with mingled feelings, foremost among which was one of puzzled bewilderment. For minute by minute it was borne in on me that I had met this gentleman before, though I could not place him in my memory. Yet something in his features, in his grace of manner, seemed strangely familiar, reminding me of some one I had lately met. But of whom? And where?