OF THE LONELY HUT ON THE SHORE


THAT I should do full justice to the ample meal before me after my scanty fare of the past two days was not to be wondered at. Meantime, my host chatted pleasantly upon general subjects, more especially upon the wars in Flanders, in which I gathered he had studied the art of war under the great Turenne. Here was a subject upon which, as soldiers, we could both grow enthusiastic; and we exchanged mutual reminiscences of that great man--conceded to be the most celebrated general of his age. At length, when the wine was put before us, I said slowly:

“Doubtless you are curious to learn, sir, how I came to be in the position from which you rescued me?”

“As to that,” he replied, “seeing that I cannot at present return the like confidence as regards myself, I can respect your reticence. Enough that we are followers of the same profession. War is a common mistress for uniting her devotees all the world over.”

Yet glancing across at him, I felt that he deserved some further explanation, though I resolved not to reveal the whole truth. Little did I guess that had I indeed done so, the whole future course of my life would have been changed. Little did I dream what strange vagary Fate was playing me there in that little cabin with the grey light of morning falling upon the handsome face of the man before me!

“Nay,” I said carelessly, “’tis a common story enough. I escaped yesterday from a rascally privateer, upon which I had been entrapped.”

“They are the curse of the seas!” he said impetuously. “’Tis a sign of the times and a scandal to our navy that such hornets are permitted to sail with impunity. Even upon our own Devon coast I have known men to have been kidnapped for the plantations.”

He stopped abruptly, as if he had said too much, and I saw a shade of annoyance for a moment upon his face. But on my own part, though I pretended to see nothing, I was quick to notice his confusion; and toying with my glass, I replied:

“I learn, sir, from the seamen that this vessel is bound for Southampton; had it been at all possible, I would fain have landed in Devonshire.”

“Nothing is easier,” he responded. “My own destination is Teignmouth; if this will suit your convenience, you are welcome to accompany me ashore.”

“Sir,” I made answer, “you are a very courteous gentleman, and right gladly do I accept your offer.”

He bent his head in acknowledgment.

“Then that is settled,” he replied gaily, with a wave of the hand, as if dismissing the subject. “For the rest, I fear I do but play the host indifferently. Your glass is empty, permit me to replenish it. And now, sir, what think you of Luxembourg’s qualities as a general?”

Thereupon we plunged once more into a discussion of the campaigns in Flanders, upon which subject I found my companion to have an intimate knowledge; so that it was not until nearly an hour later that we ascended to the deck. We there found a distinct change for the better in the appearance of the weather. A fitful gleam of sunshine stole occasionally through the heavy grey clouds and the mist was gradually clearing from the surface of the water. Away to the north, a dark streak of land was faintly discernible, which the master speedily informed us was the distant coast of Devon. But the wind had fallen considerably and the little vessel forged but slowly through the water. One thing I could not help but notice--the unusual deference paid by the master to my companion; confirming me in my opinion as to his rank and quality. All morning, indeed, we sailed slowly along the coast, seeing no other vessel, for at this time the fear of the French kept our merchantmen to the harbours, save when a goodly number could be conveyed by a fleet of men-of-war. And with every hour I could see that my companion’s impatience to reach our destination visibly increased. Though still preserving his courteous demeanour towards me, a dozen times, at least, I heard him demand of the master whether sail could not be increased. But the latter only shook his head, and noon found us some four miles south of Prawle Point. It was shortly afterwards that we descended to the cabin to dine; but our meal was not concluded ere we were again summoned to the deck by the report of a suspicious sail. My companion rose at once, and together we ascended to the poop, where we found the master anxiously scanning a sail that showed plainly through the mist some ten miles to the southward. Nor had we ourselves escaped observation, for even as we stood watching, the vessel’s course was changed and she bore down upon us.

My companion turned to the master with a mute inquiry in his eyes.

The latter shook his head with a lugubrious air. “’Tis not, yon vessel will prove to be some rascally French picaroon. Were there more wind I would not fear the result; but I misdoubt gentlemen, whether we shall see Teignmouth this trip.”

The gentleman at my side uttered an exclamation of annoyance.

“But our bargain, captain?” he cried quickly. “You have been paid to carry me to Teignmouth, and a bargain is a bargain.”

“Aye,” the other answered doggedly; “and a life is a life; and what think ye would ours be worth should yonder rascals run us aboard? No, no, Exmouth is our only refuge, for there is a king’s ship in the harbour--and Lord send that we see it safely!”

In vain my companion remonstrated with him, the fellow was as stubborn as a rock. And in the light of recent events I could not but admit the justice of his decision. One concession only would he agree to make--to run in shore as close as possible and to provide us with a boat, by which my companion and I might leave the ship if we so desired.

Slowly the afternoon wore away as the chase continued. With every hour the sun shone out more radiantly, its level beams falling full upon the white canvas of our pursuing foe; and upon an ominous row of guns that boded ill for the brig if it were overtaken. From time to time my companion fell to thoughtfully pacing the deck, at others he would take the master aside, as if to learn his opinion as to our chances of escape. As for me, I had no desire to intrude upon his privacy or to seem curious as to the reason for his evident anxiety. I withdrew, therefore, to the stern, and leaning upon the low bulwarks, fell into conversation with the man at the helm.

He was a rough, weather-beaten old seadog and was willing enough to respond to my advances and to impart me information.

“Aye, aye,” he said in reply to a question I put him. “She will catch us sure enough ere we reach Exmouth, if so be as the king’s ship hear not the sound of our guns.”

He glanced as he spoke with sailorly pride at a few antiquated pieces of brass cannon that had to me the appearance of the veriest toys. “Take my advice, master,” he added in a lower tone, so that no one but myself might hear, “leave the ship if ye have the chance; ’tis a deal the safer.”

A moment later his mahogany face resumed its ordinary blank expression, as a quick step sounded behind me, and turning swiftly, I found my host at my elbow.

“The time has come, sir,” he said quietly, “to determine our future course of action. For my own part, I have decided to leave the vessel, but I would not unduly influence your own decision. Should you consider yourself safer on board, you are at full liberty to remain.”

I flung a quick glance around me. Dusk had fallen, but some two miles away loomed the rugged cliffs of Torbay. Astern the pursuing vessel had crept up to within three miles of us. My mind was speedily made up.

“On the contrary,” I made answer, “I shall be pleased to accompany you; though I fear, sir, that you will find me more of an encumbrance in the boat than otherwise.” And I briefly informed him of my wound. But he waived aside all my objections, and after a few moments’ earnest conversation with the master he retraced his steps to my side.

“In five minutes’ time, sir, a boat will be provided for our departure. If you have any preparations to make, I pray you then to be in readiness.”

He bowed as he spoke and descended the ladder to the little cabin to collect I supposed his own belongings; as for me, I went below to the forecastle and donned once more the clothes I had worn when I first came on board. This done, I made my way on deck. Swift as I had been in the process, I found my companion already awaiting me with visible impatience upon his countenance. To my muttered apology he took no heed, but stepped to where a boat was already lowered alongside.

“At your convenience,” he said, with a waive of his hand towards the stern.

“But,” I replied hesitatingly, “there is but room for two. You do not mean----”

He shrugged his shoulders negligently.

“Our friend here is already shorthanded, therefore for the nonce I must be my own oarsman. Have no fear, however, on that account,” he added with a smile, as I broke out into a few words of remonstrance. “’Tis not the first time I have handled an oar, though I must confess to being of late years sadly out of practice.”

He seated himself as he spoke, and without further delay I took the place assigned to me, and with a few words of kindly leave-taking and advice from the rough seamen above us--which my companion courteously acknowledged by raising his laced hat--the rope was cast off and the little vessel forged rapidly ahead.

To me there was something strange and incongruous in the sight of this gentleman with his aristocratic face and bearing and his shapely white hands--upon one of which I descried a magnificent ruby--yet plying the oars with the skill of one accustomed to such exercise. For the rest, we had covered but half the distance when the pursuing vessel passed us little more than a mile astern; but to our satisfaction she did not alter her course, but held on in pursuit of the brig. It was growing rapidly dark when we approached the cliffs, and passed slowly along them, seeking some break in their granite barrier where we might safely land. The unusual exertion I could see was telling upon my companion, though he resolutely refused to allow me to change places with him, and presently we came upon such a place as we sought. Two tongues of rock jutting crescent-shape from the base of the cliff left a clear space between them some ten feet wide, through which the tide poured with the fury of a millrace. Inside this rocky opening it widened into a little bay, the whole forming a natural harbour, ending in a white pebbly beach. So much we could see, but no more; and without hesitation my companion pulled for the narrow entrance on the crest of a huge roller. We had reached it, were all but through, I had opened my lips to congratulate him upon his skill when he uttered a shout of warning. Whether we had miscalculated the width of the opening in the deeper shadows cast by the cliff, or whether my companion’s oar struck against a sunken rock I do not know, but on a sudden the boat capsized, and I found myself struggling in the water. Of the next few moments I have but a confused recollection, for I am no swimmer. I know that the wave swept me forward, that I went under, rose to the surface sank again, and the next moment my feet touched the bottom, and I found myself gasping waist deep in the water. I dashed the water from my eyes and made for the beach. A little to my right I saw the dark outline of the boat floating bottom upwards. At the same moment a heavy object struck against my knees, all but sweeping me from my feet, and glancing downwards, I saw the white face of my companion, white, but with a crimson splash upon his forehead. I caught his arm and with set teeth braced myself to meet the back wash. When this had passed, I raised my companion’s inert form in my arms and staggered up the beach beyond reach of the water. Then I laid my burden down and stooped to examine his injuries. He was quite insensible and was bleeding profusely from a long, ragged cut upon the temple, inflicted, doubtless, by a sunken rock or by the boat itself when it capsized. Nor for all my efforts could I restore him to consciousness. Once, indeed, as I bound up the cut with the scarf taken from his neck, he groaned slightly, and bending my head closer--for the darkness had deepened around us--I fancied that I saw his eyelids quiver. But he speedily lapsed once more into total unconsciousness, so that I began to fear that his injuries might be severer than I had at first imagined. ’Twas essential, above all things, that I should procure assistance, and that speedily, ere it became quite dark. Accordingly I rose to my feet and took a rapid survey of my surroundings. On either side of me towered the rugged cliffs, but in front the beach gave way to a narrow valley--one of those bosky coombes so common to the coast of Devon. I started to ascend it, therefore, and scarcely had I advanced a quarter of a mile than I was overjoyed to see a light shining through the trees. Towards this I directed my steps, and presently found myself standing upon the edge of a little clearing in the centre of which stood a rude hut. By this time the moon had risen above the torrs, and in its clear light, a short distance away, I saw a white road running past the head of the coombe. From the hut itself came the sound of hammering, with now and again a snatch of song. I lost no time in approaching and knocking with my clenched fist upon the door. At the sound both song and hammering died away, and a moment later the door was opened and disclosed the figure of the singer.

He was a little old man, dressed in rough fisherman’s attire and with the most prominent eyes I had ever seen. Indeed, his whole appearance gave me the impression that he was not overburdened with wits. The interior of the hut was of the poorest description. On the one side I caught sight of a half-finished boat, upon which the fellow had been engaged when I had disturbed him. Upon the other was a couch of dried fern leaves. This, together with a rough table and stool and a litter of nets, seemed to sum up the total of his property. Yet when I had given him a hurried explanation, he readily consented to return with me for my companion, and a minute later we were striding down the coombe side by side. I gathered on the way that we had landed upon the northern coast of Torbay, and that Cleeve itself lay little more than two miles distant. I learned also that two days before a French fleet of six sail of the line had put into the bay, but that upon the approach of a British squadron they had sailed hurriedly for the coast of France, so that all danger of invasion was at present at an end.

“Ah,” thought I, “so, my lady, your pretty scheme has failed, and the wheel of fortune turns once more in my favour!” We found my companion still lying in the same position in which I had left him, and raising him in our arms, bore him with difficulty--for he was no light weight and the trees were thick--back to the hut. But it was upon reaching this latter, and depositing our senseless burden upon the bed of ferns that fate culminated in the strangest trick of all. For no sooner did the old man beside me catch sight of my companion’s face in the light of the rushlight fixed to the wall than he uttered a startled exclamation.

“Lord save us!” he cried. “’Tis the master himself.”

“How, fellow!” I said in surprise. “You know this gentleman?”

“Aye, aye,” he answered, scarce finding his tongue. “Know him? I have lived this forty years upon his land.”

“Then who is he?” I cried, no suspicion of the truth dawning upon my mind. “Speak out, man?”

“You do not know?” he stammered. “You do not know the Earl of Cleeve?”

“What!”

In my surprise I gripped his arm so tightly that he cried out in sudden pain, and wrenching himself free, caught up his hammer and put the table between us. But as for me I had forgotten the fellow’s very presence, and stood staring down into the white face of the man before me with but two thoughts gradually dawning upon my stunned senses; for if this man’s words were true, then this--this--was the Earl of Cleeve, and my lady’s brother. As all the possibilities of what this latter phrase might mean to be flashed suddenly upon my mind I could have shouted aloud in my elation. It was not that I knew this man’s name to be proscribed, it was not for the sake of the reward offered by government for his capture, though that alone might have tempted a more sordid man than I--no, it was the knowledge that I held his secret and his life in the hollow of my hand--that now at last I would have a full and final reckoning with my lady. At last! Oh, I would wring that proud heart! I would humble that haughty spirit to the very dust! I would crush her without pity or remorse! She should plead--kneel--nay, grovel at my feet--for the life that I would refuse!

We had parted last with but little seeming hope for me to obtain revenge; now all the cards were in my hand, and the man whom she had scorned, despised, and struck--struck!--I swore a bitter oath at the remembrance--had power to bring ruin upon her house and make her taste the bitterness of death!

As I conjured up the picture of that proud head bowed low in sorrow, I laughed aloud in my exultation. Then my eyes encountered those of the owner of the hut, who still remained in the same attitude, suspiciously regarding me, and I came back to earth with a sudden start.

“Pshaw!” I said contemptuously. “I will do you no hurt, man! See, I am in a merry mood!--a right merry mood!” And again I laughed exultantly.

“Aye,” he muttered, crossing himself, “but ’tis merriment that is not good to hear.”

I paid no further attention to him, but bent low over my companion’s prostrate form and looked long and earnestly in his face. Now I understood at a glance the likeness to some one that at our first meeting had so puzzled me; now on a sudden I remembered of whom the voice and manners had reminded me. Surely I had been blind not to see before the likeness to my lady. Even as I gazed at him the colour returned slightly to his cheeks, and his lips parted in a scarcely audible sigh. I sank on one knee beside him and threw open his riding coat. Had I needed corroboration of the fisherman’s words, I received it then, and the mystery as to why he had retained his coat in the cabin was at once made clear. For beneath it he was clad in a suit of violet-coloured velvet and his breast glittered with the insignia of some half dozen orders, among which my eyes fell upon the blue ribbon of the Garter and the Order of St. Louis. The hilt of his sword, too, which had been concealed before by his outer coat, was thickly studded with jewels, though the blade itself was of the finest Toledo steel, as I speedily discovered when I essayed to test it. This latter weapon I did not hesitate to appropriate for my own use, and it was with a sigh of satisfaction that I fastened it to my side; for ’tis wonderful what a feeling of security may be given to a man by the possession of three feet of good honest steel.

Oh, it was all clear to me now--clear as daylight! As James’s most trusted councillor, having great influence in Devonshire and the adjacent counties, he had been hurriedly dispatched by his master to create a diversion in his favour by heading a general rising of the Jacobites throughout the West. By which means James relied upon William withdrawing some of his veteran troops from Ireland to quell it. That it was a plan hurriedly formed and as hurriedly executed was plain, seeing that the earl had not had time to don any disguise ere proceeding on board. I bade my unwilling host bring water, and with this I bathed my companion’s wound and again adjusted the bandage.

“He will do now,” I said briefly to my host, who had drawn slowly near, watching the proceedings with marked attention. “Leave me to think, my friend!”

He drew back at that into a corner of the hut and stood furtively regarding me, whilst I seated myself upon the stool at my patient’s side and rapidly reflected how best I could profit by this unexpected development. For some little time I remained buried in thought, reviewing in all its details a scheme which gradually increased in favour with me the more I conned it. With so much satisfaction did it present itself to my mind that my breath grew quicker at the thought, and I moistened my dry lips in pleasurable anticipation. Indeed, so absorbed was I in my own thoughts that it was with a start of genuine surprise I heard from without the sharp clink of a hoof striking against a stone, with the sound of a hearty oath. I sprang to my feet and laid my hand upon my sword. I had my own reasons for not desiring any company at that moment.

“The door, fool!” I cried to the old man, as there came the sound of footsteps without and the jingle of harness. “Bar the door!”

But it was too late. Even as the words left my lips, and as he moved to execute my bidding, on a sudden the door was flung open, and a harsh voice cried: “Within there! Can’st tell me how far it is to--Cassilis?” I think that an oath rose to my lips also; for there, framed in the doorway, with his rein slung upon his arm, stood the man of all others that I least desired to see.

“De Brito!” I cried when I had recovered from my surprise. “What brings you here?”

“I might with equal justice demand the same of you,” he answered. “But as I have ridden express from Dartmouth with a message for you, I may as well acquit me here of my errand.”

“For me?” I cried in still more surprise.

“Aye,” he replied, drawing a sealed paper from his breast; “though I little expected to find you here when I saw the light from the road yonder. Curse me, if I understand it!”

“That is my affair,” I said coldly. “Give me the letter.”

“Aye, but,” he continued, unheeding my words, “your uniform--and-- ’Sdeath! whom have we there?”

He had, for the first time apparently, observed the inanimate figure behind me. And at that moment the earl stirred slightly and groaned. I had placed myself so as to screen his face from De Brito’s view and I now hastened to answer the latter with what carelessness I could assume.

“’Tis a long story,” I replied, “and must wait the telling at some future opportunity. But amongst other adventures I was carried off by a privateer. This is a common sailorman, who assisted me to escape and was hurt in so doing.”

“Indeed!” De Brito answered with a sneer. I could read in his eyes that he did not believe my words. “But that I have your word for it I had not given you credit for playing the part of good Samaritan. How now! What are you staring at, old death’s head?”

Following the direction of his eyes, I saw that the old man had drawn gradually nearer during this brief conversation and was now gazing from one to the other of us with a peculiar expression upon his face. Meeting my eyes, he drew back hurriedly, muttering to himself. I turned again to De Brito.

“Enough!” I said impatiently. “The man is half a fool. And now the paper!”

He had no further excuse for withholding it and gave it into my hands. Doubtless he hoped that I should move nearer to the light so that he might be enabled to indulge his curiosity. But I was too wary to be so caught, and while opening it I still preserved my position in front of my companion so that he was unable to get a sight of his face. Finding that I was not to be enticed thus, he sulkily retired a few steps, and whilst still keeping a watchful eye upon him I turned my attention to the letter in my hand. Its contents were brief and to the point.

“This is to warn you news has been received that the Earl of Cleeve hath set sail for England to effect a rising in favour of James Stuart. So much we know from one who hath betrayed him; but not his landing place. Therefore, be on your guard. Keep watch upon the house. Keep watch upon the servants. ’Tis not unlikely he will endeavour to communicate with his home. And forget not that a thousand crowns await his apprehension.” The letter was signed “Colonel Savage” and was dated July 4, 1690.

With what feelings I read these words, knowing that the object of this reward lay helpless at my feet, may well be imagined. I raised my eyes to De Brito. He was staring fixedly past me, an evil smile curling his lips.

“You say that the regiment is at Dartmouth,” I said at length.

“Aye,” he answered laconically. “What then?”

“This,” I replied quickly, anxious only to be rid of his presence. “You will return at once and tell Colonel Savage from me that I will obey his instructions in every respect. Aye, and if he can spare me twenty troopers, so much the better. That is all, I think.” And I glanced meaningly at the door. But for the moment he made no offer to move.

“Before I go,” he said slowly, “I would ask you a question.”

“Well, what is it, man?” I cried impatiently.

“Do common sailors wear such rings as that?” he answered, nodding in my direction.

I will own that his words took me somewhat off my guard. I cast a quick glance behind me, and saw at once what had caught his attention. The earl had moved slightly, and one hand hung down by his side, and upon it, flashing and scintillating in the wavering light, was the magnificent ruby I had remarked when in the boat. But I was quick to regain my wits.

“Tush!” I replied with affected carelessness. “Stolen, no doubt. Did I not say it was a privateer?”

“No doubt,” De Brito answered with a sneer. “And that white hand--was that stolen also?”

But my patience was fast vanishing. “Hark you!” I said sternly, fingering my sword hilt. “If you are wise you will not seek to meddle with my affairs. You have received your orders. Go!”

For a moment he stood facing me, a dark scowl upon his face. But he knew that I was the better swordsman and he had no stomach for a fight. Stifling an oath, he turned upon his heel and left the hut. I followed him through the door and watched him mount. When he had gathered up the reins preparatory to departing, he turned in his saddle and addressed me.

“Good-night to you, Captain Cassilis,” he cried mockingly. “I think I promised you once not to forget you. Well, ’tis a pleasant night for a ride, and Meriden lies but a mile or so out of my way!” Then in a sudden outburst of rage he shook his fist at me with a furious oath. The next moment he had set spurs to his horse, and I heard the beat of his hoofs die away upon the night.