OF THE COMING OF THE DUTCH DRAGOONS


AT the little bridge over the moat, the tall figure of my antagonist had halted, but upon my appearance on the terrace he turned his back on me and strode off resolutely in the direction of the cliffs. And I--I followed him with a strange conflict raging in my breast. ’Twas not of fear for the result of the encounter, though I did not deceive myself but that I should find a formidable opponent in the man before me. At that time skill in the use of the rapier formed not the least part of the education of a gentleman, and I could not doubt but that his Grace would have benefited by the lessons of the best foreign masters. No, it was rather a knowledge of the certain penalty that the success of my scheme must exact, and a feeling that I was playing a part more worthy of a hero of _romaunt_. Yet as my lady’s face as I had last seen it rose up before my eyes, I felt a simple pleasure in the thought that I could minister to her happiness. When all that I had it in my heart to perform was done, would she then think of me with scorn and loathing I wondered? Would the memory of me be but one of shuddering aversion in all the years to come? Happen what might, I knew that I could no longer deceive my own heart; that the image of this woman’s face would be with me until the end. All this time I had been striding rapidly through the moonlit gardens in the wake of the earl. On reaching the pathway at the head of the cliffs I paused to cast one lingering look in the direction of the manor. Here and there I could see lights shining through the trees, but no sound came from the house to show that our flight was as yet discovered. The gardens themselves were very still. A few bats fluttered silently through the darkness. Overhead, the moon sailed higher into the heavens, across which, ever and anon, a great star flashed and vanished. From below me came up the low murmur of the tide along the shore. It was such a night as might well shame the lust of murder in men’s hearts by its calm serenity. Light as it was, I found the descent of the cliff path to be little calculated to soothe the nerves of one about to engage in a duel of more than life. But the earl did not even pause in the descent--doubtless familiarity with it in his boyhood had robbed it for him of all its terrors--and for very shame’s sake I followed, pressing, I will confess, as near as possible to the cliff wall upon my right and striving to avoid gazing into the abyss at my side. Arriving at length at the foot of the path, I found my antagonist already testing the surface of the patch of sand that I had chosen. I saw that the steward had spoken truth. The boat lay close to the edge of the incoming tide. For the rest, the sand was firm, and the moon rendered the spot as suitable as one could desire for the matter in hand.

“I trust that the ground meets with your Grace’s approval?” I said after a short silence.

“Excellently well,” he answered, turning for the first time towards me. “And now, sir, under the existing circumstances I think that we may waive the usual formalities.”

As he spoke he divested himself of his outer coat and the starred and decorated one below it. This done, he tossed aside his hat and wig and stood before me in his shirt of white cambric; and then indeed, at sight of the splendid specimen of manhood thus revealed, had I been a timorous man, I might well have fallen to reckoning up my chances of success. But no thought of that entered my mind as, throwing off my own poor coat, I bared my arms to the elbow, and drawing my rapier, tested it against the side of my boot. ’Twas the one that he had taken from the wall, and was a good bit of steel, pliant and nicely weighted--as indeed it had need to have been, seeing the issues that hung upon its blade. Then I advanced to take up my position upon the sand and, saluting briefly, we fell to work and our swords crossed. Aye, and from the very first I knew that I had met an adversary whom it would tax all my skill to conquer. From the beginning he fought with a cool determination--a calm confidence of the result that did little towards steadying my somewhat wild fence of the first few moments. For my mind was busy picturing what was already happening inside the house, and every minute I expected to hear the voices of the dragoons from the cliffs above that should tell of our discovery. Never before, not even when I met and worsted Galliani, the finest blade in Italy, nor when, before Belgrade, I had slain the celebrated Azim Alli before the eyes of two armies, was my skill in swordplay so put to the test. To and fro across the little patch of sand we thrust and parried; the rasping of our blades mingling with the lap of the encroaching waves. But never once, for all my fierce attack, could I get past that iron guard, and when, after five minutes had passed, and we drew back for a moment, as if by mutual consent, to regain our labouring breath, neither of us could boast of having gained any advantage over his opponent.

Save that the handsome face of the man before me was slightly pale, he was outwardly as calm, as self-possessed as ever, rather as if he were engaged in some friendly encounter with the foils than with an adversary whose reputation with the rapier--I speak it in all sincerity--was common talk from London to Vienna.

But the moment’s breathing space had steadied my nerve, and when, in response to my brief, “On guard, sir!” our blades again crossed, the fierce joy of the combat had entered into my veins, and I resolved to put in practice a certain thrust that had been shown me many years before by an old sergeant of Papenstein’s dragoons. ’Twas a sure and deadly thrust to those unknowing of its defence; and though I had no intention of pressing it home to a fatal issue, I felt assured of its success for the purpose I had in view. But to accomplish it required the utmost nicety of distance; and so, in pursuance of my object, I attacked him again so fiercely that I drove him back to the very edge of the sand. But once there my wrist weakened, my thrusts became more and more feeble. Then, as he gave a sudden rally, I began to give ground before him. Step by step I retreated, barely keeping him at sword’s point; and so well must I have played my part that, as he plyed me with thrust on thrust and I still fell back, I saw a faint smile curl his lips. And I too smiled in my heart as, without removing my eyes from his, I yet marked the exact spot where I should strike. And a moment later my chance came. For, thrusting high, as he threw up his arm to guard, I entwined my blade round his with a wrench that all but disarmed him, and in the same movement with an upward turn of the wrist I ran him through the body.

Without a groan his sword dropped from his hand, and, staggering slightly, he fell face downwards upon the sand. In a moment, throwing my own weapon from me, I was down on my knees by his side. A brief examination showed me that I had not miscalculated my thrust save by a hair’s breadth from the spot that I had marked. The wound was high up in the muscles of the right breast, and my experience told me that ’twas but a matter of a week or two at most ere he was again upon his feet.

On a sudden, as I stooped over him, I heard the sound of a footstep striking against a stone, accompanied by a muffled cry. Leaping to my feet, I turned in time to see the figure of a man hurrying down the cliff path behind me. I confess that at the sight my heart almost stopped beating, for I thought that my labour had been in vain and that the dragoons were upon me. But at a second glance I recognised the familiar figure of the steward, whose approach neither of us had heard in the heat of our late encounter. A moment later he had gained my side, and was staring down, dazed and horror stricken, upon the unconscious figure of his master.

“What is this?” he stammered, his jaw falling. “What have you done? My God, you have killed him!”

“No, fool,” I answered curtly, “I have saved him!”

Yet for all the help he was capable of giving me I might as well have been without his assistance had I not caught him roughly by the arm.

“There, man,” I cried quickly, “don’t stand staring so! What of the dragoons?”

“They are searching the house,” he answered, still in the same dazed manner.

“Then recall your wits, man,” I replied. “There is not a moment to lose. Help me to lift him into the boat.”

Mechanically he stooped to obey me, and together we raised the unconscious figure at our feet and laid him carefully in the stern of the boat. This done, I ran to where we had left our clothes preparatory to the encounter, and returning, flung the earl’s riding coat, together with my own hat, coat and sword, into the boat, which the first incoming waves were already rocking. Then I signed to the steward to enter.

“Now,” I said briefly, “play the man if you would save your master’s life. Do not delay to attend his wound--a little bloodletting will do him no harm; and it were better he should remain unconscious, since of his own free will he would not escape. Pull straight for the village. Once there, spare not your gold, man. Remember, he must be well on his way to France to-night.”

“But you?--you are not coming too?” he cried.

“No,” I answered somewhat sadly; “I have other work to do. You can handle an oar?”

“In my youth,” he answered doubtfully. “But of what use is it? Such craft as are in the harbour will not float until high tide, and that will not be for another hour. They will ride back to the village and will search the vessels there.”

I remembered then that he spoke the truth. The stone jetty all but enclosed a small harbour, inside which, save at high tide, the fishing craft lay high and dry. Well, ’twas but another danger to be met in the part that I was about to play. “Have no fear of that,” I replied. “They will not continue their search. I will answer for it.”

“Not for such a prize as that?” he said doubtingly, nodding towards the unconscious figure in the stern.

“Man, man,” I cried impatiently, “you are wasting precious moments! I tell you they will not search further because--the earl will be here.”

As I spoke I thrust the oars into his hands, and with a powerful heave I sent the little boat dancing out upon the water. And the final impression I had of it was of the bewildered face of the steward as he pondered upon my last words, of which I could see he had not grasped the meaning. But turning on my heel, I strode back up the beach to the scene of our late encounter, and swiftly donned the earl’s bedecorated coat, peruke and hat. This done, I picked up his richly jewelled sword and thrust it into the sheath. Then I turned to look at the boat.

Already it had passed beyond the point of rock at the head of the little bay, and nothing met my eyes but the empty waste of waters. Slowly I returned to the water’s edge and pondered upon my next move. So far everything had succeeded as I had planned, and there but remained for me to play the final part. How still was the night! How lonely the spot! Overhead, a myriad stars studded the dark vault of heaven and were reflected in the placid water beneath. The moon looked down upon me and threw my shadow black upon the beach. The ripple of the waves amongst the pebbles at my feet was as some soul-inspiring melody guiding and beckoning me upward along the path of honour. I had turned, with the intention of again seeking the gardens, when a shout from above caused me to raise my head. I saw at a glance that all further initiative was taken from my hands. Here and there lanterns flashed upon the cliffs, and in their light I caught the glint of steel. The cry was quickly caught up and answered from different directions, and a moment later several dark figures appeared upon the path. I came to a standstill and awaited their approach, for it occurred to me that the longer I could possibly delay them, the better would be the earl’s chance of escape. So I drew my sword and stood out full in the moonlight, a noble-looking figure, I make no doubt, in my rich dress, beneath which, nevertheless, my heart was beating painfully. At a nearer approach I recognised the blue coats and white facings of William’s Dutch dragoons. They were part of the troops I imagined that had been hastily sent for from The Hague at the commencement of the present crisis, when James’s landing in Ireland had thrown the nation into a state of panic. That they did not relish the pathway down which they must come was apparent to me; nevertheless, a tall officer, followed by some half dozen troopers, slowly made their way to the beach. At the foot of the path he halted for a moment until his men had spread out in a half circle behind him. Then he advanced towards me.

“Surrender!” he cried in English, though with a strong foreign accent.

“It would appear, sir,” I replied in his own language, of which I had gained a fair knowledge in my campaigns in Flanders, “that there is no other choice left to me.”

At my words his face was almost ludicrous in its surprise. He was a tall man, as I have said, and of a most melancholy countenance. I took him to be one of those unfortunates whom promotion persistently passes over.

“How?” he cried. “Your lordship speaks Dutch?”

I made him a low bow by way of answer. It was as well to sustain my part.

“As you hear for yourself, sir,” I replied.

“Then,” he answered, dropping his English, and taking a step nearer to me, “I have the honour to arrest you, my lord, in the name of his Majesty, King William!”

I raised my hand in deprecation.

“One moment, sir,” I replied coolly. “Ere I render you my sword, I must also have the honour of knowing to whom I am to deliver myself. Might I warn you to withdraw your foot--you are just within sword-reach, and I am somewhat over-hasty.”

He drew back quickly at that. The troopers closed in nearer to me. Stout-looking fellows they were for the most part and eager, I could see, to begin the affray. But the melancholy officer made no sign; on the contrary: “If that be all,” he answered with a touch of pride, “I think that I can satisfy your lordship. I am Pieter Van Someren, lieutenant in his Majesty’s Delft dragoons, and son of the burgomaster of that town.”

Again I swept him a low bow. “And pardon me!” I continued, raising my eyebrows. “In command of these troops, may I ask?” I thought that his face fell somewhat.

“Well, no,” he said hesitatingly. “To speak truth, my commanding officer is above; but the pathway is not to his liking, and--well--” he added, shrugging his shoulders, “he is from the ranks.”

There was that in his tone which caught my attention and of which I was quick to take advantage.

“Yet he is in command, nevertheless, by your own confession.”

“Sir,” I answered haughtily, “you are a man of birth yourself. You will readily understand that it is against my honour to surrender save to the officer of senior rank.”

For a moment he hesitated, and I could see there was a struggle going on in his breast. True, they might overpower me by a concerted attack, but there was also the risk of my being killed in the struggle, in which case farewell to all hope of the reward offered for my apprehension--or rather for that of the man whom I was impersonating. At the same time I had appealed to him as to an equal, and to be thus classed was flattering to his pride. I knew what his reply would be ere he opened his lips.

“As you please!” he said stiffly. And turning to one of the troopers, he gave a rapid order that sent the man hurrying back by the way that they had come.

So there, after the sounds of his departing footsteps had died away upon the path, we remained in the same attitudes facing each other; all save the lieutenant, who withdrew a few paces apart, where he could command a better view of the man’s progress. Suddenly he uttered a quick exclamation:

“What is this?” he cried, stooping to examine something at his feet. “This sand is all trampled--and there is blood here!”

For a moment I confess that I was taken aback, but only for a moment; then the wit that nature had given me asserted itself. “Ah,” I said, coolly, “a little affair of honour, sir, before your arrival.”

“But,” he replied, looking up at me with a puzzled air, “what of your opponent, my lord?”

I shrugged my shoulders carelessly. “The sea has its secrets, sir,” I replied, meeting his gaze frankly. “It is a safe hiding place.”

He glanced searchingly over the moonlit surface of the water, as if he half expected to see the body there; I could tell that he was not wholly satisfied. But like a sensible man, he forebore to question me further. After all, what concern was it of his? Had he not already made his name famous by my capture? Small time, indeed, had he for speculation, for already the first waves were rippling gently over the sand, blotting out in a moment all traces of the recent conflict. And had we needed a further diversion, it was provided for us by the appearance of his commanding officer upon the path. Preceded and followed by a trooper, he slowly and reluctantly descended. The men had fastened their belts together and held them like a rope to keep him from the edge; but notwithstanding this precaution, it could be seen how he clung to the cliff upon his right, and upon a nearer approach could be heard to be alternately bemoaning the errand that put him in so perilous a position and conjuring his men to proceed with greater caution. I thought that a smile of contempt flitted for a moment across the face of the lieutenant, but catching my eye, it vanished instantly and he stepped to the foot of the path to await their coming. The descent safely accomplished, he presently returned, accompanied by a short, stout officer, whose appearance seemed more suited to the wine shops of The Hague than to the rocky cliffs of Devon.

“This is Major Verbrughen!” the lieutenant said curtly.

I held out my sword to the man at his side.

“Then to you, sir,” I said quietly, “I surrender myself on parole. I trust that you have not been put to inconvenience in satisfying my honour?”

“To great inconvenience,” he answered bluntly; “for which I, for one, see no necessity. But you--you English are so proud! What a country! What a road! I am a soldier--not a fly; and I do not like such work.”

What further he would have added I do not know, for the lieutenant drew him aside and began to speak to him in a low voice.

Meantime I turned my back upon them all to escape the gaze of the troopers, who had throughout stood stolidly regarding me, no doubt appraising in their own minds the value of the orders upon my breast. But presently the two men’s voices rose louder, and I caught scraps of their conversation.

“A thousand crowns!”--it was the major’s voice. “Ah, my Wilmina! Little did I dream of this when last I bade thee good-bye; but thou shalt see that I will keep my word. Yes, yes, the little house that I have so often promised thee shall be thine own at last!”

“I would have you remember, however, Major Verbrughen,” the lieutenant’s voice replied, “that to me belongs the credit of this arrest.”

“So! good lieutenant, I will not fail to make mention of you!” the other answered.

“It is not mention that I desire,” the lieutenant said sourly. “But for me the man might well have escaped, and I shall lay claim to the reward.”

“You?” the other cried hotly. “You will lay claim?”

“Why not?” the lieutenant answered, raising his voice. “Was it not my suggestion to search the gardens? Am I to do all the work and gain no profit by it?”

“And am I not in command here?” the major cried angrily; “and was it not to me that he surrendered? _You_ to receive a thousand crowns? Why, ’twould be squandered at the first gaming table you sat down to!”

“And you to spend them on your Wilmina?” the lieutenant retorted with a sneer. “Why, she has forgotten your very name ere this.”

“It is false!” the major shouted, beside himself with rage.

“You shall answer to me for your words, Major Verbrughen!” cried the other in a tone equally as loud.

I turned swiftly upon my heel and faced them. The major’s face was purple with passion, the lieutenant stood with his hand upon his sword. In the background the troopers remained standing, like so many blue-coated statues. Here was an unexpected chance of gaining time.

“Gentlemen,” I said, advancing towards them, “in that I could not help overhearing part of your conversation, I pray you pardon me. It would seem that the matter at issue is one calling rather for deeds than words. The night is still young, and the light will serve. I shall be happy to act as second to either of you gentlemen, and I make no doubt that one of your men will be equally willing to serve in a similar capacity.”

They both turned in my direction, and for a moment they stood silent, glancing first at me and then at one another.

“I am at all times ready to uphold my words,” said the lieutenant, still fingering his sword hilt. But it seemed that my very eagerness had defeated its own purpose, for----

“And I--I do not fight when engaged upon duty,” said the major stiffly. “I thank your lordship for the reminder. Lieutenant Someren, we will discuss this matter later. But the tide is rising fast, and it is full time that we returned to the house.” He turned as he spoke and cast a lingering look at the narrow path. “Is there no other way by which we can go, my lord?” he added hesitatingly.

“None,” I answered, inwardly cursing myself for my stupidity in interfering. Had I not done so it might well have been that the quarrel would have led to blows and more time might have been gained. Now, however, it was too late, and all that I could do was to cast about in my mind for some means by which I might still further delay them. I thought that the major gave a slight groan upon hearing my reply. “Lieutenant Someren,” he said after a moment’s pause, “take four men and lead the way.”

The lieutenant saluted, not a muscle of his lean face moving. Apparently he had forgotten their late estrangement and became once more a military machine. As the little party moved away: “Now, my lord,” the major continued, turning towards me, “be good enough to follow!”

I shrugged my shoulders lightly and obeyed him. He himself brought up the rear with the remaining three troopers. It was not lost upon me that the burly sergeant immediately behind me carried his pistol in his hand. Evidently he was a man of precaution and did not put the same confidence in my parole as did his superior officers. In this order, then, we commenced the ascent; nor could I wonder that to men accustomed to the flat country of Holland the task should be so unwelcome. Even I, though by this time I had gained a tolerable acquaintance with the path, could not but be moved by the weirdness of the scene. The moon threw our shadows black against the cliff, accentuating the darkness of the gulf at our side, from which, growing ever fainter as we ascended, rose up the low murmur of the tide. It was some little time, therefore, ere we gained the summit, to find a couple more troopers in waiting there. With the major and lieutenant on either side of me--preserving, however, a strict silence towards each other--and with the troopers in our rear, I passed once more and for the last time through the misty, rose-scented gardens that were filled for me with so many memories. Nor could I, for all my efforts, put the penalty that I must pay wholly from my mind. For what had I done? I, a soldier, had betrayed my trust! Had assisted a noted rebel to escape! and for what? Was it not for a mere shadowy sentiment such as a man of my experience and years should not have been guilty? But though I strove thus to reason with myself, I know that the beating of my heart increased the nearer that we approached the lighted windows of the house. For all my thoughts centred then upon what my lady would say to me, and how I should first reveal myself to her, so that the men at my side should have no suspicion of the imposture practised on them.

But do what I would, I could think of no way by which I could prepare those at the house, for my brain was in a chaos, and only the image of my lady’s face was before my eyes. Already we had reached the little bridge and, crossing, passed slowly down the terrace to where a broad stream of light came from the open door and lay in a white patch upon the gravel walk. As we passed the lighted windows of the dining hall, I strove to gain a glimpse of the interior; but the curtains had fallen to--I could see nothing. Clearly I must trust to luck that they should not betray me in their surprise.

Entering, I found some dozen troopers lounging in the hall, who sprang to attention upon our appearance. Through the open door beyond I caught sight of their horses at the foot of the broad entrance steps. In the passage leading to the servants’ quarters three or four of my lady’s women were huddled together, gazing upon the scene before them with white, scared faces. I bent my head as I passed through, that they might not see my face, and with the two officers at my heels I entered the dining hall--to find it empty.

For a moment I do not know whether in my heart I was the more disappointed or relieved to find it so. But the fact gave me time at least to collect my scattered thoughts. Already I reckoned that it could want barely another half hour until it should be high tide. I turned suddenly to the major.

“May I ask, sir,” I said calmly, “from what source you received the information as to my presence here?”

“As to that,” he replied readily, “I cannot tell you. I do but obey my orders.”

“Ah,” I answered. “And you come----?”

“From Plymouth,” he replied. “But our regiment lies to-night at Meriden.”

“And--pardon me--is it your intention to return thither at once?”

For a moment he hesitated. I think that the prospect of the long Devon miles lying between him and his comfortable quarters held but little attraction for him.

“That will depend upon the condition of our horses, my lord,” he said at length. “We have ridden far and fast to-day.”

A sudden inspiration occurred to me. “Then do me the favour, gentlemen, to look upon me as your host for the short time that you remain beneath this roof. Even misfortune must wait upon hospitality. And a bottle of wine is no mean antidote for a long night ride.”

I saw his eyes begin to sparkle. Nevertheless, he still made pretence to hesitate.

“Certainly I have no orders for immediate return,” he said slowly. “What think you, lieutenant?”

“You are in command, Major Verbrughen,” the latter answered stiffly. He had withdrawn a few paces apart, yet even his melancholy countenance showed no disapproval at the prospect.

“Well, well,” the major continued, turning towards me. “I--will look at the horses myself.” And turning abruptly on his heel, he left the room.

When we were alone I slowly crossed to the hearth, and with my back to the lieutenant, who on his part did not seem particularly desirous of conversation, I fell to thinking of all the fateful events of the day. It was whilst standing thus, that happening to raise my eyes to the broad mirror that hung above the carven mantelpiece, I saw that which banished in a moment all other thoughts from my mind. For my lady herself was in the room! I had heard no door open--no sound of footfall. Yet there, at the foot of the steps leading to the corridor above, she stood motionless, and behind her Mistress Grace.

My lady’s face was white, though still she strove to bear herself with pride. Her sister made no effort to conceal her tears. In the background I caught sight of the lieutenant bowing profoundly. Slowly, slowly she crossed the floor towards me. And I?--I stood rooted to the spot, incapable alike of speech or movement, my heart beating with a rapidity that was not far removed from pain.

Within a yard of me she stopped, and I saw her struggling with her emotion--saw the tears gathering upon her lashes--and I alone heard the low sob of anguish that escaped her lips. And hearing that, I thanked God in my heart that I had done what I had. A moment later her white hands were laid upon my shoulders, and “Cecil!” she whispered brokenly.

And then indeed I turned--and our eyes met.