OF HOW MY LADY PLAYED DELILAH


BRIGHTLY the sunshine streamed into my little room on this the first of July, 1690, a day destined to become famous in the history of Ireland, and with its dawn to usher a new era into that misgoverned island.

I sprang from my couch with nerves braced for the duties of the coming day. I was not without some misgivings that I might find my own horse to be missing. But upon opening the stable door, there was the sorrel standing in the stall, apparently unharmed. And much relieved in my own mind as regarded his safety, I led him into the yard, and mounting, rode swiftly to the village.

Here I found the sergeant and his men awaiting my arrival and eager to commence the search for the missing animals. But I was not minded to leave the inn wholly unguarded, and, moreover, the wounded man was still weak from the blow he had received and the subsequent loss of blood, and was ill fitted to take part in what might prove an arduous undertaking. I left the sergeant and three men, therefore, to keep him company, all fully armed and this time alert enough against surprise, and with the remaining eight troopers at my heels commenced the search. The track of the horses led from the stables to a little stream some hundred yards away, and there abruptly ceased. As this stream came from the torrs, I felt convinced that it was there we should look for them, probably hidden in some secluded hut, or in one of the many boulder-strewn hollows that lay amongst the hills. We turned our faces, therefore, in that direction, scattering on both sides of the stream and striving to pick up the lost trail.

But though we advanced some four miles thus, there was no sign of any tracks having left the water, and the farther we advanced, the wilder grew the scenery. Hitherto we had been ascending a series of gentle slopes, with scattered clumps of trees here and there, that grew into a dense wood on the summit of a hill immediately in front of us.

When we had descended into the valley beyond, we found ourselves completely shut in by the torrs, with nothing on either side of us but the desolate, treeless slopes with their monotonous covering of withered grass. And to add to our discomfort, the sun was gaining in power. Yet this, indeed, gave way presently to still wilder scenery than any we had yet met with; for what had before been mere hollows between the hills soon changed into deep glens, in any one of which a regiment might safely have been hidden away without discovery. Small wonder, then, that in diligently searching amongst these we soon became hopelessly lost; nor for all our endeavours could we again find the way by which we had come. Nay, more, we had so turned and doubled in the course of the last half hour that I was completely at a loss as to the direction in which Cleeve now lay. For all I knew every step that we advanced might be taking us farther and farther away from it. And seeing this, about noon I called a halt in a deep glen, where an overhanging bank afforded us some protection from the sun, though the stifling heat of the hollow was well-nigh unbearable. And here we dined upon the scanty fare with which each man had provided himself before leaving the village, though in this respect my sorrel came but poorly off, for of water there was none. As for me, small appetite had I for food, being, indeed, a prey to the keenest anxiety. A hundred times I blamed myself for proceeding so far and for thus abandoning the little party at the inn.

What might not have happened in our absence? Granted they were well armed and forewarned against surprise, nevertheless, small chance had four men against forty, and ’twas not so much with force I feared they had to deal as guile.

Yet the day was wearing on, and here were we powerless to render them any assistance. I sprang impatiently to my feet, and leaving the troopers to their meal, I climbed the hillside above; for it was not improbable that from the summit I might obtain sight of some landmark that might give me a clue as to our whereabouts. But again disappointment awaited me. There was nothing to be seen but a ring of encircling hills, devoid, so far as I could see, of human habitation. With a bitter curse at my own stupidity I descended the hill, and again we set out in the direction in which I imagined Cleeve lay.

But this, it seemed, was but to entangle us worse amongst the hills; and for hours we wandered in a network of narrow ravines, each of which exactly resembled its fellow, and seemed but to mock us by its similarity. Of our subsequent wanderings I prefer to say but little. It was not, however, until sunset that, footsore and weary, we arrived once more at the village.

No sooner did we come in sight of the inn than I was reassured as to the safety of the men I had left behind by the sight of the sergeant placidly smoking in the open doorway. In the street beyond a few rustics were standing at their doors, or chatted to one another across the street; and the whole scene was as peaceful an aspect as any village in England. Whilst the men were quenching their thirst with copious draughts of ale, I drew the sergeant aside and questioned him as to what had happened in our absence. It was in doing this that, glancing through the open window near which we were standing, I saw one of the troopers watering my horse in the yard. This done, he turned and led him towards the stable. But no sooner had he flung open the door than the empty bucket fell from his hand, and he uttered a shout that brought us running to his side. He was still standing, staring into the shed as if petrified.

“What is it? What do you see, man?” I cried as I approached.

“Look,” he answered, pointing, with a white face, within. “They are there!”

I flung him aside and peered eagerly into the stable. I could not believe my eyes; for there, in the very place which we had quitted twelve hours before on our fruitless quest, a dozen horses were standing in the stalls.

“But they are gone, man! They are gone!” I stammered stupidly when I had recovered the use of my tongue.

“Aye, they are gone,” said the sergeant laconically, “as you see.”

But now as the fact of their reappearance became plain to all, from the weary, sweating troopers there burst such a chorus of profanity as caused the horses themselves to turn their heads in mild surprise. As for me, I leaned against the doorway, and the ludicrousness of the situation striking me, gave way to unrestrained laughter--laughter, however, which had in it more of relief than mirth. For consider for a moment the situation. Here was the mare’s nest of danger that I had been raising to myself all day resolved into nothing more than a practical jest, designed, I had no doubt, by my lady to cause us annoyance.

While we had spent the day in tramping the countryside in useless search, the horses had been snugly concealed most likely in a cottage near at hand. The trick was humiliating, to say the least of it. On one point, however, it set me at rest. Surely they would not have returned the horses had they contemplated any sinister design against us. Nevertheless, in order to guard against a repetition of surprise, I bade two of the troopers sleep in the loft above the stable. And I also resolved to seek an explanation of my lady at the earliest opportunity.

Returning to the inn, I gave the sergeant a few further instructions, promising, indeed, to return again at ten o’clock to see that all was done to ensure safety for the night; and this in the presence of the landlord, though the significance of this fact did not occur to me till long afterwards.

This done, I ordered my horse to the door, and arming myself ere leaving the inn with a weapon which I thought might prove useful in the coming interview that I promised myself, I mounted my horse and rode away.

Arriving at the manor, I found the same lifelessness there that had characterised it on the preceding day, but little I recked of this at the time, for my mind was fully engrossed in thinking what I should say to my lady and in speculating upon her reply. I dismounted at the stables and gave the weary sorrel into the charge of the youth Martin who was loitering there. As I flung him the rein, “See that he is ready saddled for me in an hour’s time,” I said quietly. For answer he made a wry face and moved away with a short, derisive laugh.

I stood gazing after him in undisguised astonishment. At any other time, when my mind had not been so preoccupied, I should have chastised the young boor for his insolence. As it was, I shrugged my shoulders contemptuously and turned away. Bah! ’twas only natural, after all. Like mistress, like man! I lingered for awhile upon the terrace, loth to go indoors, until the last purple tints faded from the western sky and the soft July night wrapped the house and gardens in its silent embrace. Anon, the full moon rose above Cleevesborough, silvering the surrounding oaks and streaking the grass with their checkered shadows. Presently with a half drawn sigh I rose from the terrace wall upon which I had been leaning and passed slowly into the house. Within doors I met with the same monastic silence, though I found the candles lighted and my supper awaiting me in the dining hall; and laying aside my encumbering weapons, I applied myself to the dishes before me with all the zest of a starving man. When my hunger was appeased I filled my glass, and leaning back in my chair, gave myself up to my thoughts. And who shall say into what realms of fancy my thoughts strayed, or what dream faces of the future I saw in the flickering flame of the candles before me. Only I know that the dark eyes of my lady of Cleeve looked out at me, and her proud, elusive face stared at me from the shadows of the room. I strove to bring my mind back to the events of the past day, and the more convinced I became that the whole plot had originated in her fertile mind. For what object I had yet to learn. A glance at the clock convinced me that it was too late to seek an interview with her that night--to-morrow I would demand of her an explanation. And in the possession of that which I carried in my breast, I fancied that I should meet with some consideration at her hands. I roused myself at length from these reflections, and rising, took my cloak from the chair where I had laid it, and proceeded to buckle on my sword. This done I laid my loaded pistols upon the table, and raising my half-emptied glass to my lips, drained its contents preparatory to taking my departure.

“Captain Cassilis!” said a soft voice clearly.

I turned sharply at the sound. And at sight of the radiant vision before me, I caught my breath with a great gasp of wonder, and the glass fell unheeded to the floor and was shattered into a dozen pieces at my feet; for my lady herself was descending the stairs! My lady in a gown of brocaded satin, with a bunch of red and yellow roses in her hand. The low cut corsage that she wore displayed to full advantage the magnificent proportions of her bust, upon which diamonds flashed and sparkled in the light. Upon her gleaming hair was a large hat of pale blue velvet of the same colour as her gown and ornamented at the front with a massive silver clasp. Beneath this her eyes shone with a radiance that rivalled the jewels at her breast, and if ’twas not to Nature only that she owed the increased loveliness of her face, why then she was so exquisitely painted, that to the eyes of a plain soldier like myself its presence was undetectable. For the rest, one jewelled hand slightly raised the skirt of her trailing gown, affording a glimpse of the rich satin petticoat beneath and of a pair of high-heeled shoes with diamond studded buckles. And this portrait of my lady I carry ever in my mind through all the years; for of a truth never had she appeared so beautiful as on that night, when all the resources of art had been requisitioned to increase her alluring beauty and excitement had lent an added brilliancy to her eyes.

“Have I your permission to enter, sir?” she said softly, pausing upon the lowest step and gazing at me without apparently noticing my confusion. Only then did her words break the spell that held me tongue-tied. With a great effort I strove to recover my composure, though my heart thumped painfully in my breast and I felt the hot blood mantling to my face.

“Madam,” I stammered at length, “such permission in your own house is surely unnecessary. Especially,” I added somewhat bitterly, “as I will not intrude my unwelcome presence upon you.” And with a bow I flung my cloak over my arm.

“In that case, sir,” she answered quickly, “I fear that the very object of my visit will be defeated.”

“Your ladyship means----?” I replied, pausing in surprise.

“That it is to beg the favour of a few moments’ speech with you that I am here.”

“With me, madam?”

“With you!” she answered, smiling at my too evident astonishment, though not without some trace of embarrassment in her manner.

I was silent out of sheer curiosity, for her looks, her changed manner towards me, puzzled me.

“Captain Cassilis,” she said abruptly, “will you accept these few roses at my hands--in return for those which I so ungraciously flung away?”

And without waiting for my reply, she advanced with a soft rustling of her rich gown to the table and commenced to arrange them in a cut-glass bowl that graced the centre of the board.

As for me, I know that I stammered some reply, I scarcely remember what, for my eyes were fixed in open admiration upon her tall, graceful figure as she bent above the flowers. From where I stood upon the hearth, slightly behind her, yet close enough for the scent of her clinging draperies to be wafted to me, I could mark the faultless curve of her waist, the bare, white shoulders, and beneath her velvet hat the heavy waving masses of her hair--maddening, bewildering hair, that with every turn of her lovely head glittered in the light with the sheen of burnished gold.

My lady indeed seemed unconscious of my scrutiny as she busied herself with her task, but I fancied there was a half smile upon her lips when she turned to me suddenly and said:

“But I have not yet acquainted you with the object of my intrusion. I should be guilty of worse than ingratitude if I did not thank you, sir, for the service you so timely rendered me yesterday. If I have withheld my thanks until now, it is not that I underrate its value, nor forget the peril that you risked on my behalf.” And she flashed a glance at me that again set my heart beating rapidly.

“I beg that you will say no more, madam,” I cried hastily. “Your words already far exceed any merit that you may consider attached to my action.”

“I think that I am the best judge of that, sir,” she answered, smiling.

“The man was insulting you, madam,” I replied gravely. “In that I chanced to be in the wood at the time I count myself fortunate. Yet the meanest beggar maiden had claimed the like assistance at my hands.”

“I thank you for the comparison, sir,” my lady answered in a slight tone of pique.

“Your pardon, madam!” I replied humbly. “I fear that I put my meaning but clumsily, and with the language of the camp rather than of the Court. Yet, believe me--saving always my duty to the uniform I wear--my sword is ever at your service.”

“And in these troublous times a good sword is more priceless than rubies,” she said lightly. “Have a care, sir, that I do not take you at your word.”

“I ask for no more, madam,” I replied earnestly. “Be assured that you will not find it to fail you.”

To this she answered nothing in words, but again she raised her lustrous eyes to mine. And by that glance I accounted myself amply repaid both for the danger I had escaped and for incurring De Brito’s enmity; for if she had seemed beautiful before, judge how enchanting she now appeared, when all scorn and pride had vanished from her face and left her a very woman. Seeing her in this softer mood, I felt my courage rapidly returning.

“And I also have somewhat to say to you, my lady,” I commenced after a moment’s pause.

“Indeed?” she answered inquiringly. “But I fear that I detain you, sir? You were going out?”

“To the village, madam,” I replied, “but that can wait.”

And again I laid aside my cloak.

“Then you will not ask me to sit down, Mr. Cassilis?” she said archly.

“Madam,” I stammered in reply, crimsoning with confusion, “forgive my lack of courtesy. If I had for a moment thought, that----” And I hastily crossed the floor to where a large leather-covered chair stood against the wall. I was in the act of lifting this when, happening to raise my eyes to an oval mirror that hung above it on the oak-panelled wall, I caught the reflection of my lady’s face behind me. And it was so changed, so stamped with a look of scorn and repulsion, that I dropped the chair I was raising and turned hastily round. Yet there stood my lady beside the table, gazing smilingly at me with sparkling eyes, so that I was fain to believe that my own had deceived me, or that the mirror by some trick had played me false. Without more ado, therefore, I raised the chair and returned to her side.

“Will you place it here for me, Captain Cassilis!” she said, moving with a click of her high heels near to one of the open windows. “Is not the night too lovely to miss enjoying?”

Obediently I placed my burden on the spot she indicated, and she seated herself, facing the open window. In truth it was a most lovely night. From where she sat a glorious vista was obtained of the broad, straight terrace, the sloping lawns, whitened by the moon, with the dark shadow of the woods beyond. And, rising above these latter, in the direction of the village, the massive, square tower of the church.

A momentary silence fell upon us as we gazed--a silence which was broken at length by my lady.

“And now that I am all attention, sir,” she said lightly, “what is it that you wish to say to me?”

“Why, madam----” I began, and I hesitated awkwardly, all the fine speeches I had prepared beforehand vanishing on the instant from my memory, under the disconcerting gaze of her dark eyes. “What of the horses?” I ended somewhat lamely.

She gave a low, musical laugh, that went rippling through the room.

“As to your horses, sir!” she replied, “I have not heard that any one is missing.”

“No, madam,” I answered with what sternness I could muster. “True, there are none missing, but I fail to see what object there was in their abduction.”

“When you had matched your cleverness against mine, sir?” she said quickly.

“I confess that I had not looked upon it in that light,” I replied. “So to your ladyship I must ascribe their disappearance and for myself a day’s toilsome search.”

“I did not say so!” she answered, smiling.

“But you implied it, madam,” I persisted. “I am as well assured that the plan itself emanated from your ladyship as I am that your servants carried it into execution.”

“You would not have me incriminate them, sir?” she said quickly.

“There is no need, my lady,” I answered grimly. “For you forget that it requires but a word from me to arrest them on suspicion.”

“Then if I were you, sir,” she replied in a low voice, “I would be generous. The lion can well afford to spare the mouse.”

“True, madam,” I answered; “but when the mouse happens to stand six feet six, with a sword in due proportion, it behooves the lion to look well to his own safety!”

Again she smiled, but on a sudden her face became grave.

“I would not have any one suffer for what was, perhaps, a foolish trick,” she said. “I pray you, sir--if, indeed, you meditate retaliation for the annoyance caused you--let the punishment fall upon me.”

For a moment I stared at her without replying. The idea of any man punishing the lovely woman before me was well-nigh inconceivable.

“Reassure yourself, madam,” I said at length. “Your servants will take no injury at my hands. Only there must be no recurrence of such a trick. My troopers are rough, and for one at least of their number it has proved but a sorry jest.”

“Alas, poor man!” she answered.

“How, madam!” I cried incredulously. “You pity him?”

“Why not?” she replied quickly.

“Well--because I do not understand you, madam,” I burst out.

“I am a woman, sir,” she answered. “Is not that reason logical enough?”

“Yet a few days ago nothing would have been too bad to happen to them,” I said bluntly.

“A few days ago, sir, I did not know many things that I do now,” she rejoined, toying with a rope of pearls that hung from her shoulders. “And in that I pity him, I do but make use of the prerogative of my sex. ’Tis the divine right of woman to be inconsistent.”

To this I found no reply, and again we fell silent.

Suddenly my lady leaned forwards.

“Mr. Cassilis,” she said winningly, “will you answer me a question?”

“If it is in my power to do so, certainly, madam,” I replied.

“Then will you as a soldier tell me candidly what chance of success has James in Ireland?”

“My lady,” I answered, after a few moments’ pause, “you have asked me for my candid opinion, and giving that, I dare not buoy you up with false hopes. This only will I say, that the army which James has got together is as inferior in arms and discipline to that of William as the former leader’s ability as a general is surpassed by the latter’s military genius. One issue alone is possible--the downfall of the Stuart cause.”

She remained silent for a few moments, digesting, I suppose, my words. On a sudden she looked up.

“You have seen much service abroad, sir?” she said inquiringly.

“Aye, madam,” I made answer. “My sword has been drawn in many quarrels and has owned many masters.”

“But always in the cause of honour, sir,” she said quickly.

“Honour?” I rejoined. “Ah, madam, what have such as I to do with honour? Honour--a chimera--the dream of fools! With me, that is the cause of honour which puts most guineas in my purse, be the right of the quarrel what it may.”

“Oh,” she said impulsively, “I could not live a life like that.”

“Nay, madam,” I answered quietly, “but you are a woman--a woman sweet and beautiful and pure--thank God for it!”

“A woman with a woman’s wayward passions and sins,” she replied.

“Ah, my lady,” I answered, “sins?--you?”

She stopped me with a gesture of her hand. “How should you judge, sir, of a woman’s responsibilities or errors?”

“True, madam,” I replied with a sigh, “for I have known so few.”

“But have you no relatives, Mr. Cassilis?” she said slowly. “Is there no sister or one more dear to you that looks to you for protection?”

“None, my lady,” I answered sadly. “A sister, indeed I had, but----” I stopped, overcome by old memories.

“She is dead?” my lady said gently.

“Aye, madam,” I replied. “She was murdered! Nay, nay, do not mistake my meaning. But--well, she was beautiful, madam, and was much courted on that account. Amongst the suitors for her hand was one--a favourite of the late King Charles--a profligate--devoid as much of all moral worth and honour as was his dissolute master. Yet to this man, with a woman’s perversity, she gave the preference. Madam,” I continued in a low voice, “You will readily guess the sequel. They were married, contrary to all warning and advice. And the result, which all had foreseen, speedily followed. Within two months the libertine had wearied of his toy and of the restraints of wedlock. In a year she was dead, killed as surely by the man’s brutal neglect as if he had run his rapier through her gentle heart.”

I stopped, overcome by the emotion that my words had recalled to me, and stood staring at my lady, whose head was slightly bent, and whose long lashes swept her cheek.

Suddenly she gave a fleeting upward glance. “Forgive me,” she said gently. “I did not know.”

“There is nothing to forgive,” I answered quietly. “Rather should I crave your pardon, my lady, for intruding so sad a story upon you. It is one ill suited for a lady’s ears. I know not why I have told you.” And I turned from her and gazed out into the night with eyes that saw not the moonlit gardens before me, but only the sorrowful, girlish face of one who had loved me well. I started when my lady’s next words brought me to earth again. For the moment I had forgotten her presence in the room.

“And this man, sir,” she said slowly, “what of him?”

“I killed him, madam,” I answered quietly. “We met one early dawn in Spring Gardens, and he there paid to the brother that which he should have devoted to his wife. ’Twas that that drove me from the country and set me wandering over Europe these fifteen years. But I forget that this story can have but little interest for you, my lady.”

“Why should it not?” she replied. “Life is full of such sad stories.” She leant her head on her hand, and for a moment or two we were silent. “I, too, am troubled to-night for the safety of one I love,” she continued.

“Yes, madam?” I murmured as she paused.

“I allude to my brother,” she said quickly. “Mr. Cassilis, you know well that a battle is imminent. Alas! my brother is a true Ingram, in that he is so rash. I tremble for his safety.”

“I trust for your ladyship’s sake that your fears are groundless,” I replied, “and that you may welcome his return in happier times.”

She smiled sadly by way of answer. And instantly my mind recurred to the bill of attainder passed against him. If, thought I, he is possessed of the same indomitable will as his sister ’twill be long ere he makes his peace with William. But I did not give expression to my thought.

“And yet,” she said slowly, “I know not but that it is for the best that he is absent. Were he to know,” she continued, with a swift, upward glance at me, “that we were--shall I say--prisoners in our own house, I know not of what extreme folly he might be guilty.”

“And who could wonder, madam?” I answered, “or who could find it in their heart to blame him? What danger is there which a man beloved by you would not freely dare, and count the peril his highest privilege! What self-sacrifice for your sake too severe for one who loved you!”

“Loved me?” she said, shrinking.

“Yes, yes; who loved you!”

In my earnestness I had drawn near and laid one hand upon the back of her chair. She made no reply to my words, but I saw a slight shiver pass through her frame.

“Ah, madam, forgive me,” I said hastily. “The window is open, and you are cold.” And I made as though to close it.

“No, no, sir,” she cried hastily, rising to her feet in sudden agitation. “Indeed you are mistaken. On the contrary,” she added, raising her hand to her brow, “the room is very close, or I am not feeling quite myself. And I have left my fan in the garden. Will you permit me to fetch it, Mr. Cassilis?”

“Nay, madam, will you not rather permit me to perform this slight service for you, the while you remain quietly here?”

“I think that it is upon the fountain in the Rose Garden,” she murmured. Then as with a bow I turned away, she added: “But I cannot so far trouble you, sir. I am overmuch in your debt already.”

I had reached the window, but I turned at her words.

“A debt which you are repaying me in full to-night, madam,” I said with a smile.

“Ah!” she cried, gazing at me with increased perturbation.

“Why do you say that, Mr. Cassilis? Why do you speak like that?”

“Because,” I answered, returning her glance firmly, “by your kindness and trust in me to-night you more than reward me for that which I have suffered at your hands. And I--I seek but to serve your ladyship, however humbly!” And I turned upon my heel and left her standing there.