 SCOTT CALLS ON HIS POOR RELATION.


Ezra Little asked a good many questions of his new-found relative, but Seth Lawton's answers were vague.

"I don't see why you ever came to New York," said his host.

"I feel repaid already," replied Seth. "It does me good to see my relations. I am glad especially to find you doing so well."

"I wish I could return the compliment," said Ezra, pointedly.

"Oh, I don't complain," responded Mr. Lawton.

"Don't you ever consider what would become of you if you should get sick?"

"I am in pretty fair health, thank you, Ezra. I am not likely to injure my health with rich living."

Loammi indulged in a boisterous laugh. He evidently thought this a good joke.

Seth Lawton eyed his young relative with a glance of curiosity. Scott flushed, for he felt that Loammi was disrespectful.

"Loammi thinks it a joke to be poor," he said to himself.

When they rose from the table, Ezra Little said: "You will have to excuse me, Seth. There is a meeting this evening of some bank directors, and, as I am one of them, I ought to attend."

"Oh, don't mind me, Ezra. I can call again."

"Of course we expect you to do so," said his wealthy relative, but there was no cordiality in his tone.

"Perhaps the boys will take a walk with me," suggested Seth. "I shall be glad to have them call at my room."

"Where is your room?" asked Loammi.

"In West Sixteenth Street."

"I have an engagement," said Loammi, very brusquely.

"How is it with you?" asked Mr. Lawton, turning to Scott.

"I shall be happy to go with you, Cousin Seth," answered Scott, pleasantly.

Seth Lawton looked pleased.

Mr. Little had gone off in a hurry, followed by Loammi. Mr. Lawton and Scott remained a short time in conversation with Mrs. Little; then they, too, went out.

"I invited your cousin out of politeness," said Mr. Lawton, "but I am quite as well pleased to have you alone. I don't think Loammi will ever care much for me."

"He doesn't like poor relations," observed Scott. "He takes very little notice of me."

Seth Lawton smiled.

"Then if I were rich you think Loammi would be more polite?"

"I am sure of it."

"I am afraid it can't be helped then. I am too old to start in to make a fortune; but you are young. You may be a rich man in time."

"It doesn't look much like it now."

"Most of the rich men in New York and other American cities were once poor boys."

"I don't think my chances will be very good while I work for Mr. Little. I hope you will remain in New York."

"That will depend on circumstances. As Ezra Little said, a man of my age doesn't stand a good chance to get a position."

"I think you said you kept books in the West?"

"Yes, a part of the time."

"Shall you try to get a bookkeeper's place here?"

"I have not decided. I think I must call at Ezra's store to-morrow. I have some curiosity to see it."

"I wish it were your store instead of his."

"He would not join you in the wish. Besides, I don't think I should care to be in the dry-goods business. I suppose you mean that you would rather work for me than for him?"

"Yes."

"Thank you for the compliment, Scott. It doesn't look likely at present that I shall ever be your employer. I hope, however, that our friendship will continue and become more intimate."

They had walked to Broadway, and sauntered slowly down that brilliant thoroughfare. As they were passing the Fifth Avenue Hotel a fine-looking man, who had just left it, espied Scott's companion.

"How are you, Mr. Lawton?" he said, cordially, offering his hand.

"Very well, thank you, Mr. Mitchell."

"I didn't expect to see you here."

"I haven't been here for a good many years, but I took a fancy to make a brief visit, and see how the city has changed. I suppose you are here on particular business?"

"Well, perhaps so," laughed the other. "I am staying at this hotel. Call if you have time. I shall be here three days. That is not your son?"

"No; I am not married. It is a young cousin, Scott Walton."

"I am glad to make your acquaintance, my boy," said Mr. Mitchell, pleasantly.

"Thank you, sir."

Here the conference ended.

"That is a member of Congress from Michigan," explained Seth Lawton, in response to a look of inquiry. "I suppose he has run on from Washington for a few days."

"Is he a smart man?"

"Yes, he may be governor some time. He is a rising man."

Scott was somewhat surprised to find that his poor relation had such a prominent acquaintance; it seemed to indicate that even if he were poor and dressed shabbily, he held a good social position in his western home.

At length they reached West Sixteenth Street, and stopped at a plain three-story house. Mr. Lawton took out a night key and led the way inside and upstairs.

He occupied a front room on the second floor. It was of good size and well, though plainly, furnished.

Scott was agreeably surprised. He thought his cousin would probably occupy a small hall bedroom, for he had been long enough in New York to know that lodgings were expensive. Everything looked comfortable. There was a lounge in one corner with the head toward the window.

"I lie down here when I feel lazy," said Mr. Lawton.

"Do you board here also, Cousin Seth?"

"Partially. I breakfast in the house, but it is more convenient to take my other meals outside."

Mr. Lawton's trunk was on one side of the fireplace. It was a substantial-looking trunk, somewhat the worse for wear.

"I have in my trunk, somewhere," he said, "a picture of your mother, taken at the age of twenty. Would you like to see it?"

"Very much," answered Scott, eagerly. "I have one taken a few months before she died, but she was in ill health then."

Seth Lawton opened the trunk and soon found a small photograph album. The second picture represented the attractive face of a young woman of twenty.

"Do you recognize it?" asked Seth.

"Yes," answered Scott, the tears coming to his eyes. "I wish I had one like it."

"I will have it copied, and you shall have one of the copies."

"I don't like to put you to that expense, Cousin."

"The expense will be small. In return, you must show me the later picture of your mother. She was my favorite cousin."

"I will be glad to do so. You have a very comfortable room."

"Yes. I hope you have a good room at Mr. Little's."

Scott shook his head.

"I don't want to complain, but I should like it better if there were a window in it."

"No window?" repeated Seth, puzzled.

"No. It is an inside room on the third floor."

"Small, I suppose?"

"Yes; I don't think it is more than eight feet by ten."

"It must be close."

"It is. Still, the bed is comfortable."

"What sort of a room does your cousin Loammi have?"

"A fine room on the second floor, large and handsomely furnished."

"Is there no larger and better room which you could occupy?"

"Yes, there are two, but they consider my little room good enough for me."

Seth Lawton looked thoughtful.

"I am sorry you are not more comfortably accommodated," he said. "There may be better things in store for you, however. By the way, I see your trousers are frayed about the bottoms."

"Yes; they are getting shabby."

"You ought to have a new pair."

"Yes; but I don't like to speak to Mr. Little."

"You need feel no hesitation. He has fifty dollars of yours, you told me."

"Forty dollars."

"Enough, at any rate, to provide you with new clothes. Your coat is beginning to show signs of wear."

"Yes; I am as careful of it as possible, but it will wear."

"Take my advice and ask Mr. Little at once to give you some new clothes."

"I will if you advise it."

"I do; and let me know how your application is received. This is Tuesday. Call on me again Thursday evening if you can."

"I will, Cousin Seth."

The rest of the evening was spent in talking of old times and scenes. Scott was much interested in what Mr. Lawton told him of his mother's early days. When he left the house Seth Lawton accompanied him as far as the Fifth Avenue Hotel.

"I will go in and see if Mr. Mitchell is in," he said. "Good-night, Scott."



