 THE CASH BOY'S PROMOTION.


Cousin Seth arranged everything as he had planned, and Mrs. Mead's landlord, when he called, learned to his surprise that his poor tenant was intending to move.

"Have you found cheaper rooms?" he asked.

"No, but I am going to take a whole house."

The landlord looked astonished.

"Where?" he asked.

"On West Sixteenth Street."

"Yet you have always been pleading poverty, and only last month I had to wait two days for the last dollar of the rent."

"That is true; but an old friend has found me out, and will give me a helping hand."

Of course, no more was to be said.

The removal was soon made, for Mrs. Mead had little to move, and with Seth Lawton's efficient help, the widow found herself in possession of her new establishment, with everything running smoothly.

"Now," said Mr. Lawton, "I must see if I can't do something for Willie. How much does Ezra Little pay him?"

"Two dollars and a half a week."

"That is too little."

"I don't think Mr. Little will pay more."

"Let him ask."

"I am afraid in that case he will lose his place. The last time Willie asked for a raise he was angry."

"Very well, if he loses his place I will find him another. Or, stay, I will ask Ezra myself."

"That will be better."

So Seth called the next evening on his rich relative. He was not received with open arms, for Mr. Little was under the impression that he wanted to borrow money.

"I can't give you much time to-night, Seth," said the merchant. "I have a business engagement. Have you found anything to do?"

"I think I can see my way clear to a place as confidential clerk and bookkeeper in a small office downtown."

"How much salary?"

"Possibly fifteen dollars a week."

"You had better accept. You are extremely lucky at your age to get such an office."

"You wouldn't be satisfied with it, Ezra," returned Seth, with a smile.

"I? You are dreaming. What, a well-known and long-established merchant to think of such a salary! You must be insane."

"Yet you are within five years as old as I am, Ezra."

"What does that matter? I take it there is considerable difference between your position and mine."

"Yes, I suppose so."

"To tell the truth, I didn't think you would be able to get any position at all. I hope this won't slip through your fingers."

"Then you advise me to accept it?"

"Of course. You would be crazy not to do so. Remember, you will have to depend upon yourself. The fact that you are a relation will not justify you in asking help from me."

"I have a favor to ask, however, Ezra."

"I cannot lend you money, if that's what you mean," said Ezra, brusquely.

"It isn't. I find that one of your cash boys is the son of an old friend of ours--Mary Mead, formerly Mary Grant."

"Yes; I gave the boy a place in order to help her."

"You pay him two dollars and a half a week. There are only two boys, and this is very small."

"It is all I pay any of the boys."

"But Willie is a well-grown boy of fourteen. Surely, out of old friendship, and to help his mother, you can pay him more."

"Have you been talking to Mrs. Mead, and encouraged her to think that I will increase her boy's wages?"

"Yes."

"Then you have done a foolish thing. I decline. I am half inclined to discharge the boy."

"It won't be necessary. He will leave the store at the end of the week."

"What does this mean?"

"That I will undertake to find him a better place."

Ezra looked annoyed and angry.

"You can't do it," he said. "You have no acquaintances in the city. You are not even sure of employment yourself."

"So it seems you have sized me up, Ezra," said Seth Lawton, mildly.

"That is easy enough. You were born to be an unsuccessful man. You are fifty-six years old, and I suppose you haven't saved enough money to keep you going for three months."

"I don't owe a cent, Ezra."

"That is something. But I can't remain here talking. Don't forget what I said about making sure of the place you spoke of."

"Just as I expected," thought Seth. "Ezra seems to be a thoroughly selfish man. It is lucky for me that----" but he did not finish the sentence.

Mr. Little did not think of the matter again till the superintendent told him on Saturday night: "One of the cash boys has resigned his place."

"Who is it?"

"William Mead."

"It is all the bad advice of Seth Lawton," he reflected. "He is a perfect meddler. Probably his mother will be here in a day or two to beg me to take him back."

But no such application came. Willie had obtained a place on Grand Street at four dollars a week.

Scott continued to enjoy the companionship of Seth Lawton, but sometimes Cousin Seth was out of the city for days at a time, in which event Scott was thrown back on the company of Loammi, but this gave him very little satisfaction.

One evening Loammi happened upon his cousin coming out of a store on Sixth Avenue.

"Have you been buying anything?" he asked.

"Yes."

"What?"

"A couple of neckties."

"Where did you get the money?"

Scott said, quietly: "That is my business, Loammi."

"I thought you gave pa all the money you had."

"I gave him forty dollars."

"How much have you got left?"

"I don't care to tell."

This was enough for Loammi, who saw a chance to do his cousin an ill turn. Accordingly he said to his father that evening: "Pa, did you know that Scott had money?"

"What do you mean?"

Then Loammi told the story.

"I asked him how much he had, and he wouldn't tell me. It seems to me he ought to have handed it to you."

In this Mr. Little agreed with his son.

"Call Scott," said he.

Scott was in his small chamber, and there Loammi found him.

"Pa wants to see you, Scott."

Scott went downstairs and into Mr. Little's presence.

"Do you wish to see me, sir?"

"Yes. Loammi tells me you have some money."

"Yes; I have a little money."

"I thought you gave up all you had when you came here."

"So I did, all but sixty cents, but I have regretted it since."

"Why?"

"Because I understood it was to be used for my clothing, and it was not."

"I told you in what light I considered it. But I won't dwell upon that now. You deceived me in letting me think you had given up all your money."

"No, I did not, sir."

"Then how do you explain your having money at present. Was it given you by Mr. Lawton?"

"No, sir."

"Where, then, did you get it?"

"It was money that I was swindled out of by a fellow passenger. I induced him to return a part of it."

"How much have you now?"

"About five dollars."

"You may give it to me."

"I prefer not to do so, Mr. Little; I need it myself."

Scott spoke respectfully, but firmly.

"Do you refuse?" demanded Ezra, angrily.

"Yes, sir."

"Do you think this is a suitable return for all I have done for you?"

"You have given me a home, but it is in return for services in your store. As for this money, it was given me by my father and I prefer to keep it."

Ezra Little was taken aback by the boy's resolute tone. On the whole, he decided not to press the demand.

"Be it so," he said; "but understand that I shall, hereafter, give you nothing but your board and lodging. When you require clothing or anything else, you must buy it yourself."

"I understand, sir."

"Seth has been talking to that boy," reflected Ezra Little. "It would serve him right for me to discharge him."

But Ezra Little knew that Scott was an excellent salesman, and that he could not supply his place at less than eight dollars a week, so he did not care to dismiss him.

"I'll bring him to terms yet," he said to himself.



