 AN UNEXPECTED MEETING.


Loammi and his father arrived late in the evening at Niagara, and put up at the International Hotel. Had they looked back in the book of arrivals they would have seen the name of Scott Walton, but they failed to do so.

As they sped over the Central Railroad, Loammi was in high spirits. It was his first long journey and he felt somehow that it would increase his consequence. He was prepared to make much of it on his return, and he felt that his friends and schoolfellows would be impressed.

The International Hotel seemed to him quite grand, and as he had never been a guest at a hotel before, he quite enjoyed his new way of living.

"Isn't it fine, pa?" he said, as they walked through the office.

"It is fine enough," responded his father, practically, "but it costs money, Loammi; I expect they'll be charging me four or five dollars a day."

"Oh, well, pa, you can afford it."

"That may be, but I am afraid it is money thrown away to pay your expenses on such a trip. It would have been better to pay you ten dollars, and let you stay at home."

"I wouldn't have been willing to do it, pa. Wouldn't Scott like to be traveling as we are doing?"

"I presume he would. You haven't heard anything of him, have you?"

"No."

"He can't be in New York, I should say."

"He's probably tramping about somewhere," said Loammi, rather contemptuously.

"I think the boy has some business talent," his father remarked, who was not so much prejudiced as his son.

"Oh, I suppose he'd pass, but he couldn't hold a place. He had to leave you and now he's left Tower, Douglas & Co."

"Do you know why he left them?"

"One of the clerks told me he was too fresh."

This was not quite correct, as it was Loammi who had designated his cousin in that way.

While they were waiting for breakfast, a traveling acquaintance from Boston, a Mr. Norwood, greeted them.

"Do you know," he said, "there's an English earl staying in this hotel?"

"Is there? Who is it?" asked Ezra Little, for he had a reverence for rank.

"It is the Earl of Windermere."

"Yes, I know of the title. Have you seen him?"

"No, but I saw his name on the register."

"I hope we shall meet him, pa," said Loammi. "It would be quite a feather in our cap if we could get introduced to him."

"I should like that myself, Loammi. Do you know if he is a young man, or an old one, Mr. Norwood?"

"He is a young man, under thirty."

"We will look for him at breakfast."

When they took their seats at the table, Mr. Little said to the waiter: "I hear there's an earl staying at the hotel?"

"Yes, sir."

"Could you point him out to us?"

The waiter looked across the room.

"He generally sits at that table, sir, but he has not come in yet."

"Is any one of his family with him?"

"I don't rightly know. There's a boy goes round with him a good deal--about the age of this young gentleman."

"I will try to get acquainted with him, pa," said Loammi. "I guess that'll be the easiest way to get in with the earl."

The breakfast proceeded and was nearly over for Loammi and his father, when the waiter came up.

"There's the earl just coming in, sir," he said, "and the boy with him."

Both father and son looked toward the earl with eager curiosity. They did not at first take special notice of the boy. When they did, Loammi grasped his father's arm in excitement.

"The boy looks just like Scott," he said.

"It is Scott," pronounced his father, looking through his eyeglasses.

"Nonsense, pa, it can't be!" said Loammi. "It's ridiculous to think of Scott being in company with an earl."

"Ridiculous or not, it is a fact."

"Perhaps they are not together," said Loammi, who did not like to believe that his humble cousin was in such aristocratic company. "Is that the boy that usually goes around with the earl?" he asked, turning to the waiter.

"Yes, sir, it's the very identical boy," answered the waiter.

"I never heard of such a thing," gasped Loammi. "That boy's cheek seems too great for anything. But perhaps he is the earl's valet, though I don't know how he could have got the position."

"I don't know but he's the earl's brother," said the waiter. "Anyhow, they're pretty thick. They went out riding together yesterday afternoon."

"He isn't the earl's brother," said Loammi, emphatically. "He's a--a relative of ours."

"Lor' now, you don't mean it! Didn't you know he was traveling with the earl?"

"No," answered Loammi; "I haven't seen much of him lately."

"The earl seems to think everything of him. They're always together."

"I never was so astonished in my life, pa," said Loammi, when the waiter had left them.

"It does seem singular."

"I'll get Scott to introduce me."

"I thought you didn't care to take any more notice of him."

"No more I did, but as he's intimate with an earl that makes a difference."

Mr. Little and his son lingered at the table till they saw the earl and his young companion rise. Then they followed them out.

Scott had not noticed the presence of Loammi and his father, but it was soon made evident to him.

As he was walking with the earl, suddenly he felt a tap on his arm, and looking round espied Loammi.

"Loammi!" he exclaimed, in surprise.

"Yes, I am here with pa. I was surprised to find you here."

Scott smiled.

"I have been traveling for some weeks," he said.

"Here's pa."

"How do you do, Scott? I hope you are well," said Ezra Little, graciously.

"Very well, thank you."

The earl, noticing that Scott had met acquaintances, walked slowly on.

"Won't you introduce us to your friend, Scott?" asked Loammi, eagerly.

"If he is willing," Scott said.

He went up to the earl and acquainted him with his cousin's request.

"Are they friends of yours, Scott?"

"I can't say they are friends, but they are my cousins. I have told you of them. They are my cousin, Loammi Little, and his father."

"Do you think they know who I am?"

"Yes. It is probably your title that makes them desirous of an introduction."

"Very well."

In answer to a look, Loammi and his father approached.

"My lord," said Scott, formally, "let me present to you Mr. Ezra Little and his son, Loammi. They are relatives of mine."

"I am glad to meet any relative of my young friend, Mr. Walton," said the earl, with dignity.

"My lord earl," said Mr. Little, with a profound bow, "I am indeed honored in making your acquaintance."

"And I, too," murmured Loammi.

"I am an Englishman, like yourself, my lord."

"And so, I believe, is my young friend, Scott," said the nobleman.

"Yes," said Scott, "but I have nearly forgotten it. I intend to be an American citizen."

"I shall never forget that I am an Englishman," observed Ezra Little.

"Gentlemen," said the earl, "will you excuse me? I have a letter to write."

"Certainly, my lord."

"I will meet you in half an hour, Scott," said the earl, familiarly. "You will find me in the reading room."

"How on earth did you get so thick with the earl, Scott?" asked Loammi.

"He seemed to take a fancy to me."

"Are you with him a good deal?"

"Yes."

"How can you afford to stay at this expensive hotel?" asked Ezra Little.

"I am traveling on business."

"For what house?"

"Please excuse my mentioning just yet."

"How long are you going to stay here?"

"I expected to leave this morning, but I have a letter from my employers with instructions that will detain me here a day or two longer. But how do you and Loammi happen to be here?"

"I have business in Buffalo."

Scott smiled.

"So have I," he said.

"I intend to make large purchases from the assignees of Frost, Burks & Co."

"I shall probably meet you both this evening."

As Scott walked away, Loammi said, enviously: "Did you notice how well Scott was dressed?"

"I didn't notice."

"He doesn't look much like the poor relation we took in some months ago. But it won't last."



