 HOW THE NIGHT ENDED

  One year ago my path was green,   My footstep light, my brow serene;   Alas! and could it have been so       One year ago?   There is a love that is to last   When the hot days of youth are past:   Such love did a sweet maid bestow       One year ago.   I took a leaflet from her braid   And gave it to another maid.   Love, broken should have been thy how,       One year ago.                         --_Landor_.


As my horse whinnied and I turned into the wood a man walked boldly toward me.

"My dear Donovan, I have been consoling your horse during your absence. It's a sad habit we have fallen into of wandering about at night.  I liked your dinner, but you were rather too anxious to get rid of me.  I came by boat myself!"

Gillespie knocked the ashes from his pipe and thrust it into his pocket.  I was in no frame of mind for talk with him, a fact which he seemed to surmise.

"It's late, for a fact," he continued; "and we both ought to be in bed; but our various affairs require diligence."

"What are you doing over here?" I demanded.  I was too weary and too perplexed for his nonsense, and in no mood for confidences.  I needed time for reflection and I had no intention of seeking or of imparting information at this juncture.

"Well, to tell the truth--"

"You'd better!"

"To tell the truth, my dear Donovan, since I left your hospitable board I have been deeply perplexed over some important questions of human conduct.  Are you interested in human types?  Have you ever noticed the man who summons all porters and waiters by the pleasing name of George? The name in itself is respectable enough; nor is its generic use pernicious--a matter of taste only.  But the same man may be identified otherwise by his proneness to consume the cabinet pudding, the chocolate ice-cream and the fruit in season from the chastening American bill of fare, after partaking impartially of the preliminary fish, flesh and fowl.  He is confidential with hotel clerks, affectionate with chambermaids and all telephone girls are Nellie to him.  Types, my dear Donovan--"

"That's enough!  I want to know what you are doing!" and in my anger I shook him by the shoulders.

"Well, if you must have it, after I started to the village I changed my mind about going, and I was anxious to see whether Holbrook was really here; so I got a launch and came over.  I stopped at the island but saw no one there, and I came up the creek until I grounded; then I struck inland, looking for the road.  It might save us both embarrassment, Irishman, if we give notice of each other's intentions, particularly at night.  I hung about, thinking you might appear, and--"

"You are a poor liar, Buttons.  You didn't come here alone!"--and I drove my weary wits hard in an effort to account for his unexpected appearance.

"All is lost; I am discovered," he mocked.

He had himself freed my horse; I now took the rein and refastened it to the tree.

"Well, inexplicable Donovan!"

I laughed, pleased to find that my delay annoyed him.  I was confident that he was not abroad at this hour for nothing, and it again occurred to me that we were on different sides of the matter.  My weariness fell from me like a cloak, as the events of the past hour flashed fresh in my mind.

"Now," I said, dropping the rein and patting the horse's nose for a moment, "you may go with me or you may sit here; but if you would avoid trouble don't try to interfere with me."

I did not doubt that he had been sent to watch me; and his immediate purpose seemed to be to detain me.

"I had hoped you would sit down and talk over the Monroe Doctrine, or the partition of Africa, or something equally interesting," he remarked.  "You disappoint me, my dear benefactor."

"And you make me very tired at the end of a tiresome day, Gillespie. Please continue to watch my horse; I'm off."

He kept at my elbow, as I expected he would, babbling away with his usual volubility in an effort, now frank enough, to hold me back; but I ignored his talk and plunged on through the wood toward the creek. Henry Holbrook must, I argued, have had time enough to get out of the creek and back to the island; but what mischief Gillespie was furthering in his behalf I could not imagine.

There was a gradual rise toward the creek and we were obliged to cling to the bushes in making our ascent.  Suddenly, as I paused for breath, Gillespie grasped my arm.

"For God's sake, stop!  This is no affair of yours.  On my honor there's nothing that affects you here."

"I will see whether there is or not!" I exclaimed, throwing him off, but he kept close beside me.

We gained the trail that ran along the creek, and I paused to listen.

"Where's your launch?"

"Find it," he replied succinctly.

I had my bearings pretty well, and set off toward the lake, Gillespie trudging behind in the narrow path.  When we had gone about twenty yards a lantern glimmered below and I heard voices raised in excited colloquy.  Gillespie started forward at a run.

"Keep back!  This is my affair!"

"I'm making it mine," I replied, and flung in ahead of him.

I ran forward rapidly, the voices growing louder, and soon heard men stumbling and falling about in conflict.  A woman's voice now rose in a sharp cry:

"Let go of him!  Let go of him!"

Gillespie flashed by me down the bank to the water's edge, where the struggle ended abruptly.  I was not far behind, and I saw Henry Holbrook in the grasp of the Italian, who was explaining to the woman, who held the lantern high above her head, that he was only protecting himself.  Gillespie had caught hold of the sailor, who continued to protest his innocence of any wish to injure Holbrook; and for a moment we peered through the dark, taking account of one another.

"So it's you, is it?" said Henry Holbrook as the Italian freed him and his eyes fell on me.  "I should like to know what you mean by meddling in my affairs.  By God, I've enough to do with my own flesh and blood without dealing with outsiders."

Helen Holbrook turned swiftly and held the lantern toward me, and when she saw me shrugged her shoulders.

"You really give yourself a great deal of unnecessary concern, Mr. Donovan."

"You are a damned impudent meddler!" blurted Henry Holbrook.  "I have had you watched.  You--you--"

He darted toward me, but the Italian again caught and held him, and another altercation began between them.  Holbrook was wrought to a high pitch of excitement and cursed everybody who had in any way interfered with him.

"Come, Helen," said Gillespie, stepping to the girl's side; and at this Henry Holbrook turned upon him viciously.

"You are another meddlesome outsider.  Your father was a pig--a pig, do you understand?  If it hadn't been for him I shouldn't be here to-night, camping out like an outlaw.  And you've got to stop annoying my daughter!"

Helen turned to the Italian and spoke to him rapidly in his own tongue.

"You must take him away.  He is not himself.  Tell him I have done the best I could.  Tell him--"

She lowered her voice so that I heard no more.  Holbrook was still heaping abuse upon Gillespie, who stood submissively by; but Helen ran up the bank, the lantern light flashing eerily about her.  She paused at the top, waiting for Gillespie, who, it was patent, had brought her to this rendezvous and who kept protectingly at her heels.

The Italian drew Holbrook toward the boat that lay at the edge of the lake.  He seemed to forget me in his anger against Gillespie, and he kept turning toward the path down which the girl's lantern faintly twinkled.  Gillespie kept on after the girl, the lantern flashing more rarely through the turn in the path, until I caught the threshing of his launch as it swung out into the lake.

I drew back, seeing nothing to gain by appealing to Holbrook in his present overwrought state.  The Italian had his hands full, and was glad, I judged, to let me alone.  A moment later he had pushed off his boat, and I heard the sound of oars receding toward the island.

I found my horse, led him deeper into the wood and threw off the saddle.  Then I walked down the road until I found a barn, and crawled into the loft and slept.



