 THE ROCKET SIGNAL

  Blow up the trumpet in the new moon.                         --_The Psalter_.


Rosalind was cutting sweet peas in the garden where they climbed high upon a filmy net, humming softly to herself.  She was culling out white ones, which somehow suggested her own white butterflies--a proper business for any girl on a sunny morning, with the dew still bright where the shadows lay, with bird-wings flashing about her, and the kindliest of airs blowing her hair.

"A penny for your thoughts!" I challenged.

She snipped an imaginary flower from the air in my direction.

"Keep your money!  I was not thinking of you!  You wear, sir, an intent commercial air; have you thread and needles in your pack?"

"It is ordained that we continue the game of last night.  To-day you are to invade the very citadel and deceive your aunt.  Your cousin has left without notice and the situation demands prompt action."

I was already carrying the suit-case toward the house, explaining as we walked along together.

"But was I so successful last night?  Was he really deceived, or did he just play that he was?"

"He's madly in love with you.  You stole away all his senses.  But he thought you changed toward him unaccountably on the way home."

"But why didn't she tell him?--she must have told him."

"Oh, I took care of that!  I rather warned her against betraying us. And now she's trying to punish me by being kidnapped!"

Rosalind paused at the threshold, gathering the stems of the sweet peas in her hands.

"Do you think," she began, "do you think he really liked me--I mean the real me?"

"Like you!  That is not the right word for it.  He's gloomily dreaming of you--the real you--at this very moment over at Glenarm.  But do hasten into these things that Sister Margaret picked out for you.  I must see your father before I carry you off.  We've no time to waste, I can tell you!"

The canoe-maker heard my story in silence and shook his head.

"It is impossible; we should only get into deeper trouble.  I have no great faith in this resemblance.  It may have worked once on young Gillespie, but women have sharper eyes."

"But it must be tried!" I pleaded.  "We are approaching the end of these troubles, and nothing must be allowed to interfere.  Your sister wishes to see you; this is her birthday."

"So it is!  So it is!" exclaimed the canoe-maker with feeling.

"Helen must be saved from her own folly.  Her aunt must not know of this latest exploit; it would ruin everything."

As we debated Rosalind joined her persuasions to mine.

"Aunt Pat must not know what Helen has done if we can help it," she said.

While she changed her clothes I talked on at the house-boat with her father.

"My sister has asked for me?"

"Yes; your sister is ready to settle with Henry; but she wishes to see you first.  She has begged me to find you; but Helen must go back to her aunt.  This fraudulent kidnapping must never be known to Miss Pat. And on the other hand, I hope it may not be necessary for Helen to know the truth about her father."

"I dare say she would sacrifice my own daughter quickly enough," he said.

"No; you are wrong; I do not believe it!  She is making no war on you, or on her aunt!  It's against me!  She enjoys a contest; she's trying to beat me."

"She believes that I forged the Gillespie notes and ruined her father. Henry has undoubtedly told her so."

"Yes; and he has used her to get them away from young Gillespie. There's no question about that.  But I have the notes, and I propose holding them for your protection.  But I don't want to use them if I can help it."

"I appreciate what you are doing for me," he said quietly, but his eyes were still troubled and I saw that he had little faith in the outcome.

"Your sister is disposed to deal generously with Henry.  She does not know where the dishonor lies."

"'We are all honorable men,'" he replied bitterly, slowly pacing the floor.  His sleeves were rolled away from his sun-browned arms, his shirt was open at the throat, and though he wore the rough clothes of a mechanic he looked more the artist at work in a rural studio than the canoe-maker of the Tippecanoe.  He walked to a window and looked down for a moment upon the singing creek, then came back to me and spoke in a different tone.

"I have given these years of my life to protecting my brother, and they must not be wasted.  I have nothing to say against him; I shall keep silent."

"He has forfeited every right.  Now is your time to punish him," I said; but Arthur Holbrook only looked at me pityingly.

"I don't want revenge, Mr. Donovan, but I am almost in a mood for justice," he said with a rueful smile; and just then Rosalind entered the shop.

"Is my fate decided?" she demanded.

The sight of her seemed to renew the canoe-maker's distress, and I led the way at once to the door.  I think that in spite of my efforts to be gay and to carry the affair off lightly, we all felt that the day was momentous.

"When shall I expect you back?" asked Holbrook, when we had reached the launch.

"Early to-night," I answered.

"But if anything should happen here?"  The tears flashed in Rosalind's eyes, and she clung a moment to his hand.

"He will hardly be troubled by daylight, and this evening he can send up a rocket if any one molests him.  Go ahead, Ijima!"

As we cleared Battle Orchard and sped on toward Glenarm there was a sting in the wind, and Lake Annandale had fretted itself into foam.  We saw the _Stiletto_ running prettily before the wind along the Glenarm shore, and I stopped the engine before crossing her wake and let the launch jump the waves.  Helen would not, I hoped, believe me capable of attempting to palm off Rosalind on Miss Pat; and I had no wish to undeceive her.  My passenger had wrapped herself in my mackintosh and taken my cap, so that at the distance at which we passed she was not recognizable.

Sister Margaret was waiting for us at the Glenarm pier.  I had been a little afraid of Sister Margaret.  It was presuming a good deal to take her into the conspiracy, and I stood by in apprehension while she scrutinized Rosalind.  She was clearly bewildered and drew close to the girl, as Rosalind threw off the wet mackintosh and flung down the dripping cap.

"Will she do, Sister Margaret?"

"I believe she will; I really believe she will!"  And the Sister's face brightened with relief.  She had a color in her face that I had not seen before, as the joy of the situation took hold of her.  She was, I realized, a woman after all, and a young woman at that, with a heart not hardened against life's daily adventures.

"It is time for luncheon.  Miss Pat expects you, too."

"Then I must leave you to instruct Miss Holbrook and carry off the first meeting.  Miss Holbrook has been--"

"--For a long walk"--the Sister supplied--"and will enter St. Agatha's parlor a little tired from her tramp.  She shall go at once to her room--with me.  I have put out a white gown for her; and at luncheon we will talk only of safe things."

"And I shall have this bouquet of sweet peas," added Rosalind, "that I brought from a farmer's garden near by, as an offering for Aunt Pat's birthday.  And you will both be there to keep me from making mistakes."

"Then after luncheon we shall drive until Miss Pat's birthday dinner; and the dinner shall be on the terrace at Glenarm, which is even now being decorated for a fête occasion.  And before the night is old Helen shall be back.  Good luck attend us all!" I said; and we parted in the best of spirits.

I had forgotten Gillespie, and was surprised to find him at the table in my room, absorbed in business papers.

"'Button, button, who's got the button!'" he chanted as he looked me over.  "You appear to have been swimming in your clothes.  I had my mail sent out here.  I've got to shut down the factory at Ponsocket. The thought of it bores me extravagantly.  What time's luncheon?"

"Whenever you ring three times.  I'm lunching out."

"Ladies?" he asked, raising his brows.  "You appear to be a little social favorite; couldn't you get me in on something?  How about dinner?"

"I am myself entertaining at dinner; and your name isn't on the list, I'm sorry to say, Buttons.  But to-morrow!  Everything will be possible to-morrow.  I expect Miss Pat and Helen here to-night.  It's Miss Pat's birthday, and I want to make it a happy day for her.  She's going to settle with Henry as soon as some preliminaries are arranged, so the war's nearly over."

"She can't settle with him until something definite is known about Arthur.  If he's really dead--"

"I've promised to settle that; but I must hurry now.  Will you meet me at the Glenarm boat-house at eight?  If I'm not there; wait.  I shall have something for you to do."

"Meanwhile I'm turned out of your house, am I?  But I positively decline to go until I'm fed."

As I got into a fresh coat he played a lively tune on the electric bell, and I left him giving his orders to the butler.

I was reassured by the sound of voices as I passed under the windows of St. Agatha's, and Sister Margaret met me in the hall with a smiling face.

"Luncheon waits.  We will go out at once.  Everything has passed off smoothly, perfectly."

I did not dare look at Rosalind until we were seated in the dining-room.  Her sweet peas graced the center of the round table, and Sister Margaret had placed them in a tall vase so that Rosalind was well screened from her aunt's direct gaze.  The Sister had managed admirably.  Rosalind's hair was swept up in exactly Helen's pompadour; and in one of Helen's white gowns, with Helen's own particular shade of scarlet ribbon at her throat and waist, the resemblance was even more complete than I had thought it before.  But we were cast at once upon deep waters.

"Helen, where did you find that article on Charles Lamb you read the other evening?  I have looked for it everywhere."

Rosalind took rather more time than was necessary to help herself to the asparagus, and my heart sank; but Sister Margaret promptly saved the day.

"It was in the _Round World_.  That article we were reading on The Authorship of the Collects is in the same number."

"Yes; of course," said Rosalind, turning to me.

Art seemed a safe topic; and I steered for the open, and spoke in a large way, out of my ignorance, of Michelangelo's influence, winding up presently with a suggestion that Miss Pat should have her portrait painted.  This was a successful stroke, for we all fell into a discussion of contemporaneous portrait painters about whom Sister Margaret fortunately knew something; but a cold chill went down my back a moment later when Miss Pat turned upon Rosalind and asked her a direct question:

"Helen, what was the name of the artist who did that miniature of your mother?"

Sister Margaret swallowed a glass of water, and I stooped to pick up my napkin.

"Van Arsdel, wasn't it?" asked Rosalind instantly.

"Yes; so it was," replied Miss Pat.  Luck was favoring us, and Rosalind was rising to the emergency splendidly.  It appeared afterward that her own mother had been painted by the same artist, and she had boldly risked the guess.  Sister Margaret and I were frightened into a discussion of the possibilities of aërial navigation, with a vague notion, I think, of keeping the talk in the air, and it sufficed until we had concluded the simple luncheon.  I walked beside Miss Pat to the parlor.  The sky had cleared, and I broached a drive at once.  I had read in the newspapers that a considerable body of regular troops was passing near Annandale on a practice march from Fort Sheridan to a rendezvous somewhere to the south of us.

"Let us go and see the soldiers," I suggested.

"Very well, Larry," she said.  "We can make believe they are sent out to do honor to my birthday.  You are a thoughtful boy.  I can never thank you for all your consideration and kindness.  And you will not fail to find Arthur,--I am asking you no questions; I'd rather not know where he is.  I'm afraid of truth!"  She turned her head away quickly--we were seated by ourselves in a corner of the room.  "I am afraid, I am afraid to ask!"

"He is well; quite well.  I shall have news of him, to-night."

She glanced across the room to where Rosalind and Sister Margaret talked quietly together.  I felt Miss Pat's hand touch mine, and suddenly there were tears in her eyes.

"I was wrong!  I was most unjust in what I said to you of her.  She was all tenderness, all gentleness when she came in this morning."  She fumbled at her belt and held up a small cluster of the sweet peas that Rosalind had brought from Red Gate.

"I told you so!" I said, trying to laugh off her contrition.  "What you said to me is forgotten, Miss Pat."

"And now when everything is settled, if she wants to marry Gillespie, let her do it."

"But she won't!  Haven't I told you that Helen shall never marry him?"

I had ordered a buckboard, and it was now announced.

"Don't trouble to go up-stairs, Aunt Pat; I will bring your things for you," said Rosalind; and Miss Pat turned upon me with an air of satisfaction and pride, as much as to say, "You see how devoted she is to me!"

I wish to acknowledge here my obligations to Sister Margaret for giving me the benefit of her care and resourcefulness on that difficult day. There was no nice detail that she overlooked, no danger that she did not anticipate.  She sat by Miss Pat on the long drive, while Rosalind and I chattered nonsense behind them.  We were so fortunate as to strike the first battalion, and saw it go into camp on a bit of open prairie to await the arrival of the artillery that followed.  But at no time did I lose sight of the odd business that still lay ahead of me, nor did I remember with any satisfaction how Helen, somewhere across woodland and lake, chafed at the delayed climax of her plot.  The girl at my side, lovely and gracious as she was, struck me increasingly as but a tame shadow of that other one, so like and so unlike!  I marveled that Miss Pat had not seen it; and in a period of silence on the drive home I think Rosalind must have guessed my thought; for I caught her regarding me with a mischievous smile and she said, as Miss Pat and Sister Margaret rather too generously sought to ignore us:

"You can see now how different I am--how very different!"

When I left them at St. Agatha's with an hour to spare before dinner, Sister Margaret assured me with her eyes that there was nothing to fear.

I was nervously pacing the long terrace when I saw my guests approaching.  I told the butler to order dinner at once and went down to meet them.  Miss Pat declared that she never felt better; and under the excitement of the hour Sister Margaret's eyes glowed brightly.

"Sister Margaret is wonderful!" whispered Rosalind.  "Aren't my clothes becoming?  She found them and got me into them; and she has kept me away from Aunt Pat and taken me over the hard places wonderfully.  I really don't know who I am," she laughed; "but it's quite clear that you have seen the difference.  I must play up now and try to be brilliant--like Helen!" she said.  "I can tell by the things in Helen's room, that I'm much less sophisticated.  I found his photograph, by the way!"

"What!" I cried so abruptly that the others turned and looked at us. Rosalind laughed in honest glee.

"Mr. Gillespie's photograph.  I think I shall keep it.  It was upside down in a trunk where Sister Margaret told me I should find these pretty slippers.  Do you know, this playing at being somebody else is positively uncanny.  But this gown--isn't it fetching?"

"It's pink, isn't it?  You said that photograph was face down, didn't you?"

"It was!  And at the very bottom under a pair of overshoes."

"Well, I hope _you_ will be good to him," I observed.

"Mr. Donovan," she said, in a mocking tone that was so like Helen's that I stared stupidly, "Mr. Donovan, you are a person of amazing penetration!"

As we sat down in the screened corner of the broad terrace, with the first grave approach of twilight in the sky, and the curved trumpet of the young moon hanging in the west, it might have seemed to an onlooker that the gods of chance had oddly ordered our little company.  Miss Patricia in white was a picture of serenity, with the smile constant about her lips, happy in her hope for the future.  Rosalind, fresh to these surroundings, showed clearly her pleasure in the pretty setting of the scene, and read into it, in bright phrases, the delight of a story-book incident.

"Let me see," she said reflectively, "just who we are: we are the lady of the castle perilous dining _al fresco_, with the abbess, who is also a noble lady, come across the fields to sit at meat with her.  And you, sir, are a knight full orgulous, feared in many lands, and sworn to the defense of these ladies."

"And you,"--and Miss Pat's eyes were beautifully kind and gentle, as she took the cue and turned to Rosalind, "you are the well-loved daughter of my house, faithful in all service, in all ways self-forgetful and kind, our hope, our joy and our pride."

It may have been the spirit of the evening that touched us, or only the light of her countenance and the deep sincerity of her voice; but I knew that tears were bright in all our eyes for a moment.  And then Rosalind glanced at the western heavens through the foliage.

"There are the stars, Aunt Pat--brighter than ever to-night for your birthday."

Presently, as the dark gathered about us, the candles were lighted, and their glow shut out the world.  To my relief the three women carried the talk alone, leaving me to my own thoughts of Helen and my plans for restoring her to her aunt with no break in the new confidence that Rosalind had inspired.  I had so completely yielded myself to this undercurrent of reflection that I was startled to find Miss Pat with the coffee service before her.

"Larry, you are dreaming.  How can I remember whether you take sugar?"

Sister Margaret's eyes were upon me reproachfully for my inattention, and my heart-beats quickened as eight strokes of the chapel chime stole lingeringly through the quiet air.  I had half-raised my cup when I was startled by a question from Miss Pat--a request innocent enough and spoken, it seemed, utterly without intention.

"Let me see your ring a moment, Helen."

Sister Margaret flashed a glance of inquiry at me, but Rosalind met the situation instantly.

"Certainly, Aunt Pat,"--and she slipped the ring from her finger, passed it across the table, and folded her hands quietly upon the white cloth.  She did not look at me, but I saw her breath come and go quickly.  If the rings were not the same them we were undone.  This thought gripped the three of us, and I heard my cup beating a tattoo on the edge of my saucer in the tense silence, while Miss Pat bent close to the candle before her and studied the ring, turning it over slowly. Rosalind half opened her lips to speak, but Sister Margaret's snowy hand clasped the girl's fingers.  The little circlet of gold with its beautiful green stone had been to me one of the convincing items of the remarkable resemblance between the cousins; but if there should be some differentiating mark Miss Pat was not so stupid as to overlook it.

Miss Pat put down the ring abruptly, and looked at Rosalind and then smiled quizzically at me.

"You are a clever boy, Larry."

Then, turning to Rosalind, Miss Pat remarked, with the most casual air imaginable:

"Helen pronounces either with the long _e_.  I noticed at luncheon that you say eyether.  Where's your father, Rosalind?"



My eyes were turning from her to Rosalind when, on her last word, as though by prearranged signal, far across the water, against the dark shadows of the lake's remoter shore, a rocket's spent ball broke and flung its stars against the night.

I spoke no word, but leaped over the stone balustrade and ran to the boat-house where Gillespie waited.



