 I EXPLORE TIPPECANOE CREEK

  The woodland silence, one time stirred   By the soft pathos of some passing bird,     Is not the same it was before.   The spot where once, unseen, a flower   Has held its fragile chalice to the shower,     Is different for evermore.         Unheard, unseen         A spell has been!                     --_Thomas Bailey Aldrich_.


My first care was to find the gardener of St. Agatha's and renew his pledge of silence of the night before; and then I sought the ladies, to make sure that they had not been disturbed by my collision with Gillespie.  Miss Pat and Helen were in Sister Theresa's pretty sitting-room, through whose windows the morning wind blew fresh and cool.  Miss Pat was sewing--her dear hands, I found, were always busy--while Helen read to her.

"This is a day for the open!  You must certainly venture forth!" I began cheerily.  "You see, Father Stoddard chose well; this is the most peaceful place on the map.  Let us begin with a drive at six, when the sun is low; or maybe you would prefer a little run in the launch."

They exchanged glances.

"I think it would be all right, Aunt Pat," said Helen.

"Perhaps we should wait another day.  We must take no chances; the relief of being free is too blessed to throw away.  I really slept through the night--I can't tell you what a boon that is!"

"Why, Sister Margaret had to call us both at eight!" exclaimed Helen. "That is almost too wonderful for belief."  She sat in a low, deep, wicker chair, with her arms folded upon her book.  She wore a short blue skirt and white waist, with a red scarf knotted at her throat and a ribbon of like color in her hair.

"Oh, the nights here are tranquillity itself!  Now, as to the drive--"

"Let us wait another day, Mr. Donovan.  I feel that we must make assurance doubly sure," said Miss Pat; and this, of course, was final.

It was clear that the capture of Gillespie had not disturbed the slumber of St. Agatha's.  My conscience pricked me a trifle at leaving them so ignorantly contented; but Gillespie's appearance was hardly a menace, and though I had pledged myself to warn Helen Holbrook at the first sign of trouble, I determined to deal with him on my own account. He was only an infatuated fool, and I was capable, I hoped, of disposing of his case without taking any one into my confidence.  But first it was my urgent business to find him.

I got out the launch and crossed the lake to the summer colony and began my search by asking for Gillespie at the casino, but found that his name was unknown.  I lounged about until lunch-time, visited the golf course that lay on a bit of upland beyond the cottages and watched the players until satisfied that Gillespie was not among them, then I went home for luncheon.

A man with bandaged arms, and clad in a dressing-gown, can not go far without attracting attention; and I was not in the least discouraged by my fruitless search.  I have spent a considerable part of my life in the engaging occupation of looking for men who were hard to find, and as I smoked my cigar on the shady terrace and waited for Ijima to replenish the launch's tank, I felt confident that before night I should have an understanding with Gillespie if he were still in the neighborhood of Annandale.

The midday was warm, but I cooled my eyes on the deep shadows of the wood, through which at intervals I saw white sails flash on the lake. All bird-song was hushed, but a woodpecker on a dead sycamore hammered away for dear life.  The bobbing of his red head must have exercised some hypnotic spell, for I slept a few minutes, and dreamed that the woodpecker had bored a hole in my forehead.  When I roused it was with a start that sent my pipe clattering to the stone terrace floor.  A man who has ever camped or hunted or been hunted--and I have known all three experiences--always scrutinizes the horizons when he wakes, and I found myself staring into the wood.  As my eyes sought remembered landmarks here and there, I saw a man dressed as a common sailor skulking toward the boat-house several hundred yards away.  He was evidently following the school wall to escape observation, and I rose and stepped closer to the balustrade to watch his movements.  In a moment he came out into a little open space wherein stood a stone tower where water was stored for the house, and he paused here and gazed about him curiously.  I picked up a field-glass from a little table near by and caught sight of a swarthy foreign face under a soft felt hat.  He passed the tower and walked on toward the lake, and I dropped over the balustrade and followed him.

The Japanese boy was still at work on the launch, and, hearing a step on the pier planking, he glanced up, then rose and asked the stranger his business.

The man shook his head.

"If you have business it must be at the house; the road is in the other direction," and Ijima pointed to the wood, but the stranger remained stubbornly on the edge of the pier.  I now stepped out of the wood and walked down to the pier.

"What do you want here?" I demanded sharply.

The man touched his hat, smiled, and shook his head.  The broad hand he lifted in salute was that of a laborer, and its brown back was tattooed.  He belonged, I judged, to one of the dark Mediterranean races, and I tried him in Italian.

"These are private grounds; you will do well to leave here very quickly," I said.

I saw his eyes light as I spoke the words slowly and distinctly, but he waited until I had finished, then shook his head.

I was sure he had understood, but as I addressed him again, ordering him from the premises, he continued to shake his head and grin foolishly.  Then I pointed toward the road.

"Go; and it will be best for you not to come here again!" I said, and, after saluting, he walked slowly away into the wood, with a sort of dogged insolence in his slightly swaying gait.  At a nod from me Ijima stole after him while I waited, and in a few minutes the boy came back and reported that the man had passed the house and left the grounds by the carriage entrance, turning toward Annandale.

With my mind on Gillespie I put off in the launch, determined to study the lake geography.  A mile from the pier I looked back and saw, rising above the green wood, the gray lines of Glenarm house; and farther west the miniature tower of the little chapel of St. Agatha's thrust itself through the trees.  To the east lay Annandale village; to the northwest the summer colony of Port Annandale.  I swung the boat toward the unknown north of this pretty lake, watching meanwhile its social marine--if I may use such a term--with new interest.  Several smart sail-boats lounged before the wind--more ambitious craft than I imagined these waters boasted; the lake "tramps" on their ceaseless errands to and from the village whistled noisily; we passed a boy and girl in a canoe--a thing so pretty and graceful and so clean-cut in its workmanship that I turned to look after it.  The girl was lazily plying the paddle; the boy, supported by a wealth of gay cushions, was thrumming a guitar.  They glared at me resentfully as their cockle-shell wobbled in the wash of the launch.

"That's a better canoe than we own, Ijima.  I should like to pick up one as good."

"There are others like it on the lake.  Hartridge is the maker.  His shop is over there somewhere," and Ijima waved his hand toward the north.  "A boy told me at the Annandale dock that those canoes are famous all over this country."

"Then we must certainly have one.  We could have used one of those things in Russia."

The shores grew narrower and more irregular as we proceeded, and we saw only at rare intervals any signs of life.  A heavy forest lay at either hand, broken now and then by rough meadows.  Just beyond a sharp curve a new vista opened before us, and I was astonished to see a small wooded island ahead of us.  Beyond it lay the second lake, linked to the main body of Annandale by a narrow strait.

"I did not know there was anything so good on the lake, Ijima.  I wonder what they call this?"

He reached into a locker and drew out a tin tube.

"This is a map, sir.  I think they call this Battle Orchard."

"That's not bad, either.  I don't see the orchard or the battle, but no doubt they have both been here."  I was more and more pleased.

I gave him the wheel and took the map, which proved to be a careful chart of the lake, made, I judged, by my friend Glenarm for his own amusement.  We passed slowly around the island, which was not more than twenty acres in extent, with an abrupt bank on the east and a low pebbly shore on the west, and a body of heavy timber rising darkly in the center.  The shore of the mainland sloped upward here in the tender green of young corn.  I have, I hope, a soul for landscape, and the soft bubble of water, the lush reeds in the shallows, the rapidly moving panorama of field and forest, the glimpses of wild flowers, and the arched blue above, were restful to mind and heart.  It seemed shameful that the whole world was not afloat; then, as I reflected that another boat in these tranquil waters would be an impertinence that I should resent, I was aware that I had been thinking of Helen Holbrook all the while; and the thought of this irritated me so that I criticized Ijima most unjustly for running the launch close to a boulder that rose like a miniature Gibraltar near the shadowy shore we were skirting.

We gained the ultimate line of the lower lake, and followed the shore in search of its outlet, pleasingly set down on the map as Tippecanoe Creek, which ran off and joined somewhere a river of like name.

"We'll cruise here a bit and see if we can find the creek," I said, filling my pipe.

Tippecanoe!  Its etymology is not in books, but goes back to the first star that ever saw itself in running water; its cadence is that of a boat gliding over ripples; its syllables flow as liquidly as a woodland spring lingering in delight over shining pebbles.  The canoe alone, of all things fashioned to carry man, has a soul--and it is a soul at once obedient and perverse.  And now that I had discovered the name Tippecanoe, it seemed to murmur itself from the little waves we sent singing into the reeds.  My delight in it was so great, it rang in my head so insistently, that I should have missed the creek with the golden name if Ijima had not called my attention to its gathering current, that now drew us, like a tide.  The lake's waters ran away, like a truant child, through a woody cleft, and in a moment we were as clean quit of the lake as though it did not exist.  After a few rods the creek began to twist and turn as though with the intention of making the voyager earn his way.  In the narrow channel the beat of our engine rang from the shores rebukingly, and soon, as a punishment for disturbing the peace of the little stream, we grounded on a sand-bar.

"This seems to be the head of navigation, Ijima.  I believe this creek was made for canoes, not battleships."

Between us we got the launch off, and I landed on a convenient log and crawled up the bank to observe the country.  I followed a stake-and-rider fence half hidden in vines of various sorts, and tramped along the bank, with the creek still singing its tortuous way below at my right hand.  It was late, and long shadows now fell across the world; but every new turn in the creek tempted me, and the sharp scratch of brambles did not deter me from going on.  Soon the rail fence gave way to barbed wire; the path broadened and the underbrush was neatly cut away.  Within lay a small vegetable garden, carefully tilled; and farther on I saw a dark green cottage almost shut in by beeches.  The path dipped sharply down and away from the cottage, and a moment later I had lost sight of it; but below, at the edge of the creek, stood a long house-boat with an extended platform or deck on the waterside.

I can still feel, as I recall the day and hour, the utter peace of the scene when first I came upon that secluded spot: the melodious flow of the creek beneath; the flutter of homing wings; even the hum of insects in the sweet, thymy air.  Then a step farther and I came to a gate which opened on a flight of steps that led to the house beneath; and through the intervening tangle I saw a man sprawled at ease in a steamer chair on the deck, his arms under his head.  As I watched him he sighed and turned restlessly, and I caught a glimpse of close-trimmed beard and short, thin, slightly gray hair.

The place was clearly the summer home of a city man in search of quiet, and I was turning away, when suddenly a woman's voice rang out clearly from the bank.

"Hello the house-boat!"

"Yes; I'm here!" answered the man below.

"Come on, father; I've been looking for you everywhere," called the voice again.

"Oh, it's too bad you've been waiting," he answered.

"Of course I've been waiting!" she flung back, and he jumped up and ran toward her.  Then down the steps flashed Helen Holbrook in white.  She paused at the gate an instant before continuing her descent to the creek, bending her head as she sought the remaining steps.  Her dark hair and clear profile trembled a moment in the summer dusk; then she ran past me and disappeared below.

"Daddy, you dear old fraud, I thought you were coming to meet me on the ridge!"

I turned and groped my way along the darkening path.  My heart was thumping wildly and my forehead was wet with perspiration.

Ijima stood on the bank lighting his lantern, and I flung myself into the launch and bade him run for home.

We were soon crossing the lake.  I lay back on the cushions and gazed up at the bright roof of stars.  Before I reached Glenarm the shock of finding Helen Holbrook in friendly communication with her father had passed, and I sat down to dinner at nine o'clock with a sound appetite.



