Chapter X.


Mrs. Daggett was sitting by the window gazing dreamily out, when Lydia returned after witnessing the triumphant departure of the promoter of Famous People.

“It kind of brings it all back to me,” said Mrs. Daggett, furtively wiping her eyes. “It’s going t’ look pretty near’s it used to. Only I remember Mis’ Bolton used to have a flower garden all along that stone wall over there; she was awful fond of flowers. I remember I gave her some roots of pinies and iris out of our yard, and she gave me a new kind of lilac bush—pink, it is, and sweet! My! you can smell it a mile off when it’s in blow.”

“Then you knew—the Bolton family?”

The girl’s blue eyes widened wistfully as she asked the question.

“Yes, indeed, my dear. And I want to tell you—just betwixt ourselves—that Andrew Bolton was a real nice man; and don’t you let folks set you t’ thinking he wa’n’t. Now that you’re going to live right here in this house, my dear, seems to me it would be a lot pleasanter to know that those who were here before you were just good, kind folks that had made a mistake. I was saying to Henry this morning: ‘I’m going to tell her some of the nice things folks has seemed to forget about the Boltons. It won’t do any harm,’ I said. ‘And it’ll be cheerfuller for her.’ Now this room we’re sitting in—I remember lots of pleasant things about this room. ’Twas here—right at that desk—he gave us a check to fix up the church. He was always doing things like that. But folks don’t seem to remember.”

“Thank you so much, dear Mrs. Daggett, for telling me,” murmured Lydia. “Indeed it will be—cheerfuller for me to know that Andrew Bolton wasn’t always—a thief. I’ve sometimes imagined him walking about these rooms.... One can’t help it, you know, in an old house like this.”

Mrs. Daggett nodded eagerly. Here was one to whom she might impart some of the secret thoughts and imaginings which even Maria Dodge would have called “outlandish”:

“I know,” she said. “Sometimes I’ve wondered if—if mebbe folks don’t leave something or other after them—something you can’t see nor touch; but you can sense it, just as plain, in your mind. But land! I don’t know as I’d ought to mention it; of course you know I don’t mean ghosts and like that.”

“You mean their—their thoughts, perhaps,” hesitated Lydia. “I can’t put it into words; but I know what you mean.”

Mrs. Daggett patted the girl’s hand kindly.

“I’ve come to talk to you about the wall papers, dearie; Henry thought mebbe you’d like to see me, seeing I don’t forget so easy’s some. This room was done in a real pretty striped paper in two shades of buff. There’s a little of it left behind that door. Mrs. Bolton was a great hand to want things cheerful. She said it looked kind of sunshiny, even on a dark day. Poor dear, it fell harder on her than on anybody else when the crash came. She died the same week they took him to prison; and fer one, I was glad of it.”

Mrs. Daggett wiped her kind eyes.

“Mebbe you’ll think it’s a terrible thing for me to say,” she added hastily. “But she was such a delicate, soft-hearted sort of a woman: I couldn’t help feelin’ th’ Lord spared her a deal of bitter sorrow by taking her away. My! It does bring it all back to me so—the house and the yard, and all. We’d all got used to seeing it a ruin; and now— Whatever put it in your head, dearie, to want things put back just as they were? Papa was telling me this morning you was all for restoring the place. He thinks ’twould be more stylish and up-to-date if you was to put new-style paper on the walls, and let him furnish it up for you with nice golden oak. Henry’s got real good taste. You’d ought to see our sideboard he gave me Chris’mas, with a mirror and all.”

Having thus discharged her wifely duty, as it appeared to her, Mrs. Daggett promptly turned her back upon it.

“But you don’t want any golden oak sideboards and like that in this house. Henry was telling me all about it, and how you were set on getting back the old Bolton furniture.”

“Do you think I could?” asked the girl eagerly. “It was all sold about here, wasn’t it? And don’t you think if I was willing to pay a great deal for it people would—”

“’Course they would!” cried Mrs. Daggett, with cheerful assurance. “They’d be tickled half to death to get money for it. But, you see, dearie, it’s a long time ago, and some folks have moved away, and there’s been two or three fires, and I suppose some are not as careful as others; still—”

The smile faded on the girl’s lips.

“But I can get some of it back; don’t you think I can? I—I’ve quite set my heart on—restoring the house. I want it just as it used to be. The old furniture would suit the house so much better; don’t you think it would?”

Mrs. Daggett clapped her plump hands excitedly.

“I’ve just thought of a way!” she exclaimed. “And I’ll bet it’ll work, too. You know Henry he keeps th’ post office; an’ ’most everybody for miles around comes after their mail to th’ store. I’ll tell him to put up a sign, right where everybody will see; something like this: ‘Miss Lydia Orr wants to buy the old furniture of the Bolton house.’  And you might mention casual you’d pay good prices for it. ’Twas real good, solid furniture, I remember.... Come to think of it, Mrs. Bolton collected quite a lot of it right ’round here. She was a city girl when she married Andrew Bolton, an’ she took a great interest in queer old things. She bought a big tall clock out of somebody’s attic, and four-posted beds, the kind folks used to sleep in, an’ outlandish old cracked china plates with scenes on ’em. I recollect I gave her a blue and white teapot, with an eagle on the side that belonged to my grandmother. She thought it was perfectly elegant, and kept it full of rose-leaves and spice on the parlor mantelpiece. Land! I hadn’t thought of that teapot for years and years. I don’t know whatever became of it.”

The sound of planes and hammers filled the silence that followed. Lydia was standing by the tall carved chair, her eyes downcast.

“I’m glad you thought of—that notice,” she said at last. “If Mr. Daggett will see to it for me—I’ll stop at the office tomorrow. And now, if you have time, I’d so like you to go over the house with me. You can tell me about the wall papers and—”

Mrs. Daggett arose with cheerful alacrity.

“I’d like nothing better,” she declared. “I ain’t been in the house for so long. Last time was the day of the auction; ’twas after they took the little girl away, I remember.... Oh, didn’t nobody tell you? There was one child—a real, nice little girl. I forget her name; Mrs. Bolton used to call her Baby and Darling and like that. She was an awful pretty little girl, about as old as my Nellie. I’ve often wondered what became of her. Some of her relatives took her away, after her mother was buried. Poor little thing—her ma dead an’ her pa shut up in prison—... Oh! yes; this was the parlor.... My! to think how the years have gone by, and me as slim as a match then. Now that’s what I call a handsome mantel; and ain’t the marble kept real pretty? There was all-colored rugs and a waxed floor in here, and a real old-fashioned sofa in that corner and a mahogany table with carved legs over here, and long lace curtains at the windows. I see they’ve fixed the ceilings as good as new and scraped all the old paper off the walls. There used to be some sort of patterned paper in here. I can’t seem to think what color it was.”

“I found quite a fresh piece behind the door,” said Lydia. “See; I’ve put all the good pieces from the different rooms together, and marked them. I was wondering if Mr. Daggett could go to Boston for me? I’m sure he could match the papers there. You could go, too, if you cared to.”

“To Boston!” exclaimed Mrs. Daggett; “me and Henry? Why, Miss Orr, what an idea! But Henry couldn’t no more leave the post office—he ain’t never left it a day since he was appointed postmaster. My, no! ’twouldn’t do for Henry to take a trip clear to Boston. And me—I’m so busy I’d be like a fly trying t’ get off sticky paper.... I do hate to see ’em struggle, myself.”

She followed the girl up the broad stair, once more safe and firm, talking steadily all the way.

There were four large chambers, their windows framing lovely vistas of stream and wood and meadow, with the distant blue of the far horizon melting into the summer sky. Mrs. Daggett stopped in the middle of the wide hall and looked about her wonderingly.

“Why, yes,” she said slowly. “You certainly did show good sense in buying this old house. They don’t build them this way now-a-days. That’s what I said to Mrs. Deacon Whittle— You know some folks thought you were kind of foolish not to buy Mrs. Solomon Black’s house down in the village. But if you’re going to live here all alone, dearie, ain’t it going to be kind of lonesome—all these big rooms for a little body like you?”

“Tell me about it, please,” begged Lydia. “I—I’ve been wondering which room was his.”

“You mean Andrew Bolton’s, I s’pose,” said Mrs. Daggett reluctantly. “But I hope you won’t worry any over what folks tells you about the day he was taken away. My! seems as if ’twas yesterday.”

She moved softly into one of the spacious, sunny rooms and stood looking about her, as if her eyes beheld once more the tragedy long since folded into the past.

“I ain’t going to tell you anything sad,” she said under her breath. “It’s best forgot. This was their room; ain’t it nice an’ cheerful? I like a southwest room myself. And ’tain’t a bit warm here, what with the breeze sweeping in at the four big windows and smelling sweet of clover an’ locust blooms. And ain’t it lucky them trees didn’t get blown over last winter?”

She turned abruptly toward the girl.

“Was you thinking of sleeping in this room, dearie? It used to have blue and white paper on it, and white paint as fresh as milk. It’d be nice and pleasant for a young lady, I should think.”

Lydia shook her head.

“Not,” she said slowly, “if it was _his_ room. I think I’d rather—which was the little girl’s room? You said there was a child?”

“Now, I’m real sorry you feel that way,” sympathized Mrs. Daggett, “but I don’t know as I blame you, the way folks talk. You’d think they’d have forgot all about it by now, wouldn’t you? But land! it does seem as if bad thoughts and mean thoughts, and like that, was possessed to fasten right on to folks; and you can’t seem to shake ’em off, no more than them spiteful little stick-tights that get all over your clo’es.... This room right next belonged to their baby. Let me see; she must have been about three and a half or four years old when they took her away. See, there’s a door in between, so Mrs. Bolton could get to her quick in the night. I used to be that way, too, with my children.... You know we lost our two little girls that same winter, three and five, they were. But I know I wanted ’em right where I could hear ’em if they asked for a drink of water, or like that, in the night. Folks has a great notion now-a-days of putting their babies off by themselves and letting them cry it out, as they say. But I couldn’t ever do that; and Mrs. Andrew Bolton she wa’n’t that kind of a parent, either— I don’t know as they ought to be called _mothers_. No, she was more like me—liked to tuck the blankets around her baby in the middle of th’ night an’ pat her down all warm and nice. I’ve often wondered what became of that poor little orphan child. We never heard. Like enough she died. I shouldn’t wonder.”

And Mrs. Daggett wiped the ready tears from her eyes.

“But I guess you’ll think I’m a real old Aunty Doleful, going on this way,” she made haste to add.

“There’s plenty of folks in Brookville as ’ll tell you how stuck-up an’ stylish Mrs. Andrew Bolton was, always dressed in silk of an afternoon and driving out with a two-horse team, an’ keeping two hired girls constant, besides a man to work in her flower garden and another for the barn. But of course she supposed they were really rich and could afford it. _He_ never let on to _her_, after things begun to go to pieces; and folks blamed her for it, afterwards. Her heart was weak, and he knew it, all along. And then I suppose he thought mebbe things would take a turn.... Yes; the paper in this room was white with little wreaths of pink roses tied up with blue ribbons all over it. ’Twas furnished up real pretty with white furniture, and there was ruffled muslin curtains with dots on ’em at the windows and over the bed; Mrs. Andrew Bolton certainly did fix things up pretty, and to think you’re going to have it just the same way. Well, I will say you couldn’t do any better.... But, land! if there isn’t the sun going down behind the hill, and me way out here, with Henry’s supper to get, and Dolly champing his bit impatient. There’s one lucky thing, though; he’ll travel good, going towards home; he won’t stop to get his tail over the lines, neither.”

An hour later, when the long summer twilight was deepening into gloom, Jim Dodge crossed the empty library and paused at the open door of the room beyond. The somber light from the two tall windows fell upon the figure of the girl. She was sitting before Andrew Bolton’s desk, her head upon her folded arms. Something in the spiritless droop of her shoulders and the soft dishevelment of her fair hair suggested weariness—sleep, perhaps. But as the young man hesitated on the threshold the sound of a muffled sob escaped the quiet figure. He turned noiselessly and went away, sorry and ashamed, because unwittingly he had stumbled upon the clew he had long been seeking.