CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE DEN OF THE CATTLE STEALERS.

To give an adequate idea of my thoughts and feelings at that moment, or during those that followed, would amount to a sheer impossibility. Truly I had distinguished myself.  I had undertaken to recover the stolen steed in bold and doughty fashion, and had allowed myself to be drawn into the most transparent booby-trap ever devised for the deception of mortal idiot.  Instead of returning in triumph, having fulfilled Beryl's parting injunction, here was I, strapped up helplessly, my head and face swathed in a filthy greasy Kafir blanket, only able to breathe--and that with difficulty--through its unspeakably nauseous folds.  Heavens!  I wonder I was not sick.  Kicked and punched too, and a butt for every kind of jeer and insult from these black ruffians, although of course I could not understand the burden of the latter.  But where was it going to end?

Why had they not murdered me then and there?  I thought.  Could it be that they were taking me to some secure place where they might do it at their leisure, and hide away my body in some hole or cave where there was not the smallest chance of it ever being found, and so bearing witness against themselves?  It looked like it--and the idea made my blood run cold with a very real and genuine fear.

All thoughts of rescue--of immediate rescue--I was forced to put aside; delayed rescue would be too late.  My comrades would hardly succeed in spooring us in the dark, and it was quite dark now; moreover, they were but three, and judging from the varying voices of those who held me, the latter must be fairly numerous.  No, the situation was hopeless-- abjectly hopeless.  Half-dead with fatigue and semi-suffocation, my mind a prey to the most acute humiliation and self-reproach, I stumbled on-- how I did so I hardly know.  At last I could bear it no longer.  They might kill me if they liked, but not another step would I stir until that horrible suffocating gag was removed.

Something of this must have struck them too, for after a muttered consultation, they began fumbling at the cattle thongs with which I was bound, and lo; the filthy blanket was dragged off my head, and I sat drinking in the fresh night air in long draughts.

"No talk--no call out," said a voice at my side.  "You talk--you call out, then--so."

It was not too dark to see the significant drawing of the hand across the speaker's throat by which the injunction was emphasised.  The latter I judged it advisable to obey--for the present at any rate.

In this way we kept on through the night; it seemed to me for hours.  I could make out the loom of the heights against the star-gemmed sky, and noticed that it narrowed considerably as though we were threading a long defile.  More than once I stumbled, and not having the use of my hands to save myself, fell flat on my face, to the brutal amusement of the ruffians in whose power I was.  I deemed it inadvisable to look about me too much, but could make out quite a dozen forms in front of me, and that there were plenty behind, I gathered from the hum of muffled voices.  Indeed, another sense than that of sight went to confirm any conjecture as to their numbers, for the sweet night air was constantly poisoned by a reek of rancid grease and musky, foetid humanity.  But of the three horses I could now see no sign.

At last a brief halt was made, evidently at some known water-hole or spring, for soon one of them emerged from the bush bearing a great calabash, and the sound of the splashing liquid as it was poured into bowls was as very music to my ears.  The long, rough, forced march; the dash and excitement which had preceded it, had done their work.  I was simply parched with thirst, and said so.

Thereupon the English-speaking Kafir came towards me with a smaller bowl.  He put it to my lips, but before I could reach it the brute withdrew it again and dashed the contents into my face.

"That all the water you get," he laughed.

It was too much.  Even the fear of immediate vengeance counted for nothing at that moment.  My arms were secured but my legs were not. Throwing myself backward as I sat I let out with these in such wise as to plant both feet, with the force of a battering ram, right in the pit of the stomach of my jeering tormentor as he bent over me laughing.  He rebounded like an indiarubber ball, rolled half a dozen yards, and lay writhing and groaning and gasping--while I, of course, made up my mind to instant death.

But to my surprise the other Kafirs seemed to think it the best joke in the world, for they burst out laughing immoderately, mocking and chaffing their damaged comrade, imitating him even, as he twisted and groaned in his agony.  I remembered the saying that a crowd that laughs is not dangerous, and to that extent felt reassured.  Yet, what when my victim should have recovered?  That would be the time to look out for squalls.

Taking advantage of their good humour, I uttered the word "_Manzi_." They stared; then one fellow got up and taking the calabash, shook it. Yes, there was still a little, and pouring it into a bowl brought it to me, letting me drink this time, he still shaking with laughter over the amusement I had just afforded them.  Then we resumed our way.

This seemed to be along the steep side of a mountain, and judging from the increased freshness of the air we appeared to have gained a good altitude.  Refreshed by my drink of water I was able to travel better, and I looked somewhat eagerly about, with an eye to possibilities, resolved, too, to keep one for any opportunity.  On the one hand our way seemed overhung by cliffs; on the other, space.  Finally the whole gang struck inward between what looked like narrowing rock walls, and came to a halt.

And now, as the fire which had been promptly started blazed up, I saw that our resting place was beneath a gigantic overhanging slab of rock, forming a sort of cave.  Beyond this I could catch sight of a patch of stars with dark tree-tops waving gently against them; the while I was guided to the back of the recess, and bidden to sit down, an invitation I had no desire to dispute, after my late exertions.  But they had, apparently, no idea of loosening the thongs, and my very superficial knowledge of their tongue did not rise to the point of requesting it. In sooth, I began to wish I had treated my erstwhile tormentor with a little less violence.  I could have used him as a medium of conversation at any rate.

Now from some place of concealment was dragged forth a live sheep, tied by the legs; while one of the Kafirs was sharpening a butcher's knife upon a slab of rock.  Poor beast!  Its condition appealed to me in that mine was exactly similar, and the probabilities were that its fate would be mine, with the difference that I should not be eaten afterwards; for it was there and then butchered, and the flaying and quartering being accomplished in a surprisingly short space of time, the entire carcase was disposed by relays upon the glowing fire, and indeed the hissing and sputtering, and the odours of the roast, filled my own nostrils with a grateful savour.  I could do with a mutton chop or two, after the scanty fare and hard exertion of the recent twelve hours.

Soon the feasting began, and there was a great chewing, and cracking of bones.  The while I sat and endeavoured calmly to size up the whole situation.  And its accessories were about as wild and grim as the most startling annals of any romance.  Here was I, helpless, in the power and at the mercy of a score or so of as cut-throat a set of naked and ochre-smeared savages, as such romance could picture; forcibly brought here to this probably unknown fastness of theirs, and for what?  From motives of self-preservation alone they could not afford to restore me to liberty after having once been in this, which was probably one of their most secure retreats, and I was conscious of a dire and terrible sinking of heart.  Yet there was no war between ourselves and these people.  They would hardly, therefore, go such lengths as to kill me, and so raise the whole countryside upon them.  But as against this came another thought.  There is no declared war between society and the dangerous and criminal classes in London or New York or Paris, or any other great city.  Yet he who should venture into the innermost haunts of these and place himself in their power would be extremely unlikely ever to be seen again by inquiring friends; and my case here was precisely similar.

Recognising that a well-fed man is likely to be in better humour than a fasting one, be he savage or civilised, I waited until these had nearly finished their repast before intimating by signs and such few words as I knew, that I should like some small share of it.  They stared, laughed, then one took a strip of meat from the fire, and came over to me, holding it up in a sort of bob-cherry fashion.  But I was not to be taken in so easily as that, and uttered the word for hot.  At this they laughed harder than ever, and having waited long enough, I soon got outside the mutton, hunger overcoming my repugnance to being fed in so unappetising, not to say disgusting, a fashion.  But the whole episode seemed to put them into high good humour, from which I had begun to augur great things, when an interruption occurred which was inauspicious in the extreme.  This was caused by a new arrival, none other than the evil-looking rascal whom I had rendered temporarily _hors de combat_, and who, unable to keep up with the others owing to the pain he was suffering, had now overtaken them.

The first thing this fellow did was to seize a knife which was lying idle, and rush over to me, uttering a savage snarl, his repulsive countenance working hideously with vengeful ferocity.  Instinctively I prepared to receive him in the same way as before, whereat he hesitated, and this I believed saved my life, for the others interfered and there was a great hubbub of voices, and a swaying to and fro of the crowd, as more got between him and me.  I thought it would have ended in a free fight, but at length the fellow suffered himself to be persuaded, and subsided, growling, by the fire, to make a vehement onslaught upon such meat as still remained.

Having disposed of this he came over to me again.  The other Kafirs were for the most part disposing themselves for sleep, while some had lighted pipes, and were puffing away contentedly, conversing in a deep-toned, subdued hum.  Indeed, but for my perilous situation the scene was one of wild and vivid picturesqueness--the great overhanging rocks reflecting the glow of the fires or throwing out weird, uncouth silhouettes from moving figures; the red forms of the grouping savages, and the outlandish but not unpleasing tones of their strange tongue; the rolling eyeballs and the gleam of white teeth, as one or other of them opened his mouth in a yawn or a grin.

"What you doing here?" began the fellow.

"I didn't come willingly, I was brought.  And now suppose you let me go," I answered.

"Let you go?  Ha!  See there."  And he pointed to something behind me.

I turned.  A wide dark space hitherto unnoticed caught my gaze.  A black patch it looked like.  No, it was a hole, a jagged irregular hole or crevice.

"That hole deep--damn deep," he went on.  "Let you go? yes--down there. No find again.  We cut your throat first, see--I do that--then throw you in.  No find again.  Ha!"

I believe I went pale, and I know my flesh crept all over at the prospect of this horrible fate.  But I remembered Septimus Matterson's dictum--more than once laid down--with regard to these people: "You must never let them imagine you're afraid of them."  So I laughed as I answered--

"You daren't do it.  The police would hunt you down, and then the Government would hang every man jack of you."

"Hang?  Ha!  Not it.  We don't care for no damn Government.  To-morrow morning you go down hole."

"Why wait till to-morrow?"

The ruffian chuckled.

"See better then.  Leave no spoor.  Light not good now--might forget something.  Body found, perhaps we hang.  No body found, then perhaps you not dead.  Damn deep that hole.  Ha!"

"You'll hang all the same," I said.  "You will be spoored here, and there will be plenty of traces of what has become of me."

"No trace.  We cut your throat _over_ the hole, then throw you in.  Now you go to sleep.  Morning soon come."

Grinning hideously the fellow rolled his blanket round him and lay down. Most of the others were already asleep, but it was not likely I should follow their example or act upon the ironical suggestion of my tormentor.  Was he but trying to frighten me, I tried to think? but then, a word here and there which I had caught, and certain significant glances on the part of my gaolers, seemed to bear out all he had said. They had every motive for getting rid of me, and in such wise as to leave no trace.  And here were the means all ready to their hands.