CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A DASH FOR IT.

Now I, Kenrick Holt, who do this tale unfold, am not by nature an especially intrepid animal, wherefore aught in the course of this narrative which might savour of "derring do" had better be set down to impulse, circumstance, or, generically, accident.  Further, I have elsewhere undertaken not to spare my own weaknesses, which for present purposes may be taken to mean that the hideous assurance just conveyed to me had left me very badly scared indeed.

In palliation whereof consider the position.  In all human certainty the morning light would see me as ruthlessly and as helplessly butchered as the miserable sheep which had just furnished these black cut-throats-- and incidentally myself--with an evening meal.  A ghastly and horrible fate, in sooth.  It might remain shrouded in mystery, even as the ruffian had said, but that was a mere supplementary detail which could be of no subsequent interest to me.

Rescue?  That could hardly be.  Brian, at any rate, would not desert me. But he could hardly follow up the spoor in the dark; even if he did not credit me with sufficient bushcraft to find my way back to them by some other track, he would never be here in time, and if he was, why, there were twenty or more to one.  No, that would be a broken reed to lean upon.  Besides, it was more than probable that my late companions would have their own hands full.

The vindictive ruffian who had felt the weight of my foot squatted in front of me, grinning, and every now and then passing a hand across his throat by way of reminder.  At last he too grew drowsy, and began to nod.  Then he was quickly asleep.

Now I strove to pull myself together, and with an effort rallied my shaken nerves.  What was to be done?  Not many hours of the night could there be left.  Could I free myself?  My feet were not bound.  Could I not rise and, stepping lightly through the sleeping forms, gain the outside and run for it?  But this idea occurred only to be dismissed. Unaided and without the use of my hands I could hardly climb down from the place without meeting with a bad fall in the attempt.  If I could but loosen the bonds!

As to this I had been tied up securely, yet not tightly or painfully, consequently felt little or no cramping sensation.  Now after a few minutes of careful working I managed to get my right hand free of the lower coil of the thong.  But no further could I get it because of a loop, and this held the wrist firmly.  I strained and tugged till every muscle and joint seemed cracking, and my brain bursting, but--no yielding.  Then I paused to rest, and think out some other plan.

The fire was now a heap of smouldering red ashes, so that the place was almost in darkness, which, though favouring my efforts, was all against me should these meet with success.  Then I would want a little light, or was in danger of stumbling over one of the sleepers.  Could I once free myself and avoid this, my chances were fair, for Kaffirs are heavy sleepers, and I might gain quite a good start.

But that English-speaking villain seemed possessed with a very demon of unrest, for just then he got up and went over to the fire, trying to blow it into a flame while he spread his black crooked claws over it for warmth.  At last he returned to my proximity, and after a good look at me, he lay down again.

All this had taken some while, and it was a good deal longer before I could make even the smallest move; and meanwhile time--precious time-- was creeping on.  But during it I had been thinking, and thinking hard. In the right hand pocket of my shooting-coat was a knife--a very ordinary pocket-knife--which the rascals must have overlooked in their eagerness to possess themselves of my cartridges.  I knew it was there still, for I could feel it.  And my right hand, partially freed, could all but reach it.

I tugged and tugged.  All to no purpose.  The _reim_ would not stretch a quarter of an inch further.  Then it occurred to me that if I could not get my hand to my pocket, I might still get my pocket to my hand.  The ground where I sat was rough and uneven, and by worming myself against a projection of rock I found I could do something in that direction.  It was tedious work--tedious and difficult.  Twice the knife slipped from my fingers, then at last I grasped it.  Grasped it firmly.  I was just proceeding to prize it open, when my abominable sentinel moved-- stretched himself, snorted, and opened his smoke-filmed eyes.  I lay quite still until the brute had subsided again.  Then the knife was open.

It was not very sharp, and I had some difficulty in working through the tough raw hide, but none, incidentally, in slicing my fingers over the job; but for this I didn't care.  I was now practically free.  The coils, cut through in several places, fell apart.  Heavens! how the blood surged through my whole being as I realised that escape was within reach.  But first of all I had got to make my way over those sleeping forms, and, worst of all, over, that of my restless sentinel.

Now I was ready to make the attempt.  Drawing myself cautiously up I gently slid loose from the coil, and as I did so, the abominable ruffian, uttering a muffled exclamation, started up too.  But that was all he did.  Luckily I had practised a little in the boxing line, and now I let him have it, full, fair and square--a hard, smashing, knock-out blow under the jaw.  It was delivered with battering-ram force, and laid him out, flat, inert and absolutely noiseless.

The hammering of my heart, with the exertion and excitement, seemed loud enough to awaken the other sleepers as I stepped, actually _over_ some of them.  One indeed moved, and I stood ready to administer the same curative to him if he showed sign of waking up, but he subsided again, and most of the others had their blankets over their heads.  A moment more, a tense, trying moment, and I stood outside in the open air; and as I did so I noticed the first faint indication of dawn in the far eastern sky.

The declivity was rough and stony, and the faintest clink or dislodgment of a stone might be enough to rouse those within, wherefore it behoved me to tread carefully.  But even now, though temporarily free, which way should I turn, for I had but the most rudimentary idea as to my bearings?  However, acting on my best judgment, I struck a downward course, and then suddenly a horrible effluvium was wafted to my nostrils.

I was standing upon the brink of a hollow in the heart of the thick bush.  The dawn was gradually lightening, and now, looking down into this, I could see that it was thickly strewn with innumerable bones--the bones of oxen and sheep.  Two heads, unflayed and decomposed, stared up from the white mass, the great branching horns looking spectral and menacing in the uncertain light.  Evidently this was the secret nest of a daring and organised gang of cattle stealers.

While I was debating which way to turn, a sound fell upon my ears which was as the first thrill of security, for it was the unmistakable whicker of a horse.  That meant Brian, if not all three of my late companions, returned to search for me.  Yet it would not do to make too sure, wherefore as I took my way downward in the direction of the sound I did so in silence, and soon had reason to bless my caution, for after a few minutes of walking there lay before me a small kraal.

It consisted of three huts, whose inmates were probably fast asleep, a thorn enclosure containing a few goats; but, best of all, tied to the gate-post, were two horses.  And in these I recognised the horse I had been riding, and one of the stolen ones, by name Punch.  To steal down to the spot was the work of very few minutes.  Still no sign of life, not even a dog, luckily.  Quickly I made my way to the horses.  They seemed to recognise me, and whickered again.  The goats, too, stampeded to the other side of the kraal.  Would the noise waken those villains? Quickly I untied the _reim_ which secured my own horse, and twisting a bight of it into his mouth by way of an impromptu bit, I cut through the _reim_ that held the other and mounted--of course, barebacked.

Punch at once laid himself out to follow his companion, as I knew he would.  But before I had gone a hundred paces I heard another whinny behind.  Looking back I beheld two more horses tied to a tree, just beyond the kraal--and even at that distance I recognised Beryl's favourite steed, Meerkat.  They had been hidden by a projecting shoulder of bush until now.

Athrill with excitement, for the first time since my capture I began to enjoy the adventure.  I would still redeem my pledge, and restore Meerkat, so lost not a moment in turning back to release the other two. But at the same time I saw something else.  Following down upon the track of my flight came two or three dark forms, then more and more.  My enemies had discovered my escape, and were hot foot in pursuit.  I could afford to laugh at them now, well mounted as I was, but--how about Beryl's horse?  I should hardly have time to reach it before the savages would be upon me.  It was simply a race as to who should get there first.

I have known few excitements in life to equal that moment.  The stripe of running, leaping savages converging on my objective, the lithe, ochre-smeared forms flitting through the dark green of the bush, the gleam of assegais--and the closeness of the race.  The ground was rough, and riding barebacked as I was, and with only an impromptu bridle, constituted a pretty severe test to my capabilities of horsemanship.

I was there.  I leaped off my steed, cut the _reim_ which held Meerkat, and twisting it into his mouth in the same way, mounted him--for I was determined to save him, even if all the others had to be sacrificed. Then I cut the _reim_ which held the other horse, and with all three following me, I started back, just as the foremost Kafirs leaped from the cover barely thirty yards away.

Mounted as I was, the odds were by no means in my favour, for as I have said the ground was rough and, withal, the bush was thick.  And now the whole crowd surged forward, uttering strident hisses and ear-splitting roars, intended to render my steed unmanageable and scatter the others-- and indeed how I managed even to stick on, let alone steer through bush and over stones and shuts, I hardly know to this day.  Something hit me--something hard and heavy--behind the shoulders, but without effect, the distance being too great.  Twenty yards nearer and it would have knocked me headlong, for it was a hard iron-wood kerrie hurled by no unpractised hand, and as I pressed on, the three horses galloping on either side, neighing and capering, but always keeping abreast, the roars and whistles of the pursuing barbarians making the air hideous, I felt that I was in for a very lively time indeed.  But the worst of it was that, thanks to the aforesaid roughness of the ground, they could travel nearly as fast as I could, and more than once I looked over my shoulder with something like despair as I saw how untiringly and persistently they kept up the pursuit.  At this rate my mount would soon get blown, nor was I sure I was taking the right direction.

We were racing up a long stony slope, rather more clear of bush than hitherto.  Poor Meerkat was not in hard condition, and I was beginning to regret not having stuck to my first mount.  Then the bang of a gun away on my left front scattered all reflections to the winds.

"This way, Holt!  This way!" sang out a voice, and at the same time bang went another shot.

As I proceeded to follow out Brian's injunction I looked round, just in time to see a spurt of dust fly up very near in front of my pursuers, where the bullet had struck.  These had halted, and as just then there was another bang, and another bullet fell rather nearer than the first, they evidently concluded it was too warm, and began to drop down into cover.

Brian was lying comfortably ensconced in a bush, inserting a fresh cartridge.  "I only shot to scare," he said, in his cool way, as I came up.  "They'll stop now."

"Are you all alone?"

"Yes.  Came back to look after you."

"And jolly near too late you were, old chap, for if I hadn't managed to slip my own cable, I'd have been lying at the bottom of an infernal hole at this moment, with my throat cut from ear to ear.  That's what was sticking out for me at daybreak."

"So?  Did you know those chaps were stalking you down when you started back for the two remaining horses?" he said.

"Rather.  I raced them for it.  You see, I promised to bring back Meerkat, and I'd got to do it.  But--did you see that part of it?"

"_Ja_.  Watched you all the time, but concluded that this was the best place to effect a diversion in your favour.  Well, Holt--you won't mind my saying so--but you're no fool of an imported Britisher, and that's a dead cert.  I don't expect Trask would have come out of things in that way."

"Oh, yes he would," I answered with cheerful magnanimity, for I was in secret hugely pleased with myself--not from any innate vanity, but because I should return to Gonya's Kloof with enhanced prestige.  And for certain reasons I could do with all the prestige I could capture, just then.

We had fallen back on where Brian had left his horse.  "You can have my saddle as soon as we can get out of these kloofs," he said.  "I expect you'll get sick of riding barebacked sooner than I shall.  At present we needn't lose any time.  The other horses?  Oh, they'll follow us all right.  Later on we can lead them."

"This is a nice, peaceful country of yours, Brian," I said, as we held on our way, for we saw no more of our late enemies.  "If this sort of thing happens in time of profound peace, may I ask what it's like in time of war?"

He laughed.

"You may have a chance of seeing for yourself.  Well, you have had an adventure, so long"--for I had told him of the sort of night I had spent.  "You shouldn't have gone chevying on after those schepsels all by yourself.  I kept shouting out to you to come back, and you wouldn't. I thought you'd soon give it up, and we had our own hands pretty full. I started the other two off with the oxen, and came back to look for you.  Thought I'd find you'd only been spending the night under a bush."