CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

DEVELOPMENTS.

"Well, who's for church to-day?" said Brian, one fine Sunday morning as we straggled in to breakfast.  "There's one, anyhow," he appended, as Beryl appeared, clad in a riding habit.  "Wouldn't you rather drive, Beryl?  It's going to be hot."

"No.  I think I'll ride," she answered, busying herself with the cups and saucers.  "Meerkat wants some exercise, he's getting too lively even for me.  Are you up to going, dad?"

"Make it rather a heavy load, won't it?  Still, George might ride. That'll make three of us--quite enough load too, for that heavy cart."

This was a suggestion which, overtly on the part of one of its hearers, privily on that of another, met with scant approval.  On that of George because he preferred being driven, and the shade of the cart tilt, and a comfortable seat, to the trouble of jogging over ten miles of road in the sun, and on a possibly rough-going mount.  On that of myself because I did not in the least want George on this occasion, nor anybody else. I wanted the ride alone with Beryl.  In fact, I had more than half set up this arrangement when we had heard the day before that there would be church service at Stacey's farm at the distance above stated, whither a parson had unexpectedly turned up.

"Well, I don't think I shall go at all," went on the last speaker.  "I don't feel much up to it."

"You're very wicked, dad," chipped in Iris, with a shake of the head. "Why, it's six weeks since last church Sunday."

"Quite right, kitten," laughed her father, reaching out a hand to stroke her bright sunny hair.  "Never mind.  You can behave twice as well as usual because I'm not there."

"Well, I'll stay with you."

"No, no.  I can't allow that," he laughed.  "Not for a moment."

In point of fact, the proposal had required some self-denial, for these occasions were highly popular with the children by reason of the outing involved, and the gathering at the other end, wherefore Miss Iris suffered herself to be over-ruled quite placidly.  The said gatherings were of irregular occurrence; this scattered flock for that very reason being but little shepherded.

Septimus Matterson hardly ever talked about religion or its principles; he went one better--he practised them.  For the young ones that sort of training was Beryl's province, he reckoned; while as for Brian and myself, why, we were old enough to know our own minds in such matters and act accordingly.  If we chose to attend the somewhat irregular ministrations at Stacey's we could do so; if not, that was our own business.

To-day, especially, I very much did so choose.  It was one of those heavenly mornings in late autumn which I don't believe you can get outside South Africa--no, not even in Italy--for where else will you find a sky so deeply, so vividly blue; such a sunlight sweep of gold upon rolling seas of green foliage; or open grass veldt studded with delicate-fronded mimosa; such an atmosphere too, which, with no sharp touch in it, is warm and yet exhilarating at the same time.  And the unending vistas opened up--the rise of hills, near and far, green-crested, or stately with a crown of bronze-faced cliff, glowing red gold in the generous sunlight; against a background of ever-vivid unbroken blue.  Small wonder that on such a day, as Beryl and I cantered along, our spirits were at the highest.

"I don't ride Meerkat half enough," she said.  "Look how lively he is."

I did look, and the picture was worth it.  The horse, holding high his stag-like head, deep-shouldered, delicate-limbed, yet full of fire and muscle, hardly restrainable in his sportive freshness, would have taken a good many women all they knew to manage.  Yet this one sat him to perfection, firm, light in the saddle, swaying with his every movement as though for the time being part of the steed himself; graceful, smiling, snowing no sign of heat or effort, just a little glow of health and contentment flushing her cheeks.  No, Beryl never looked better than on her favourite horse.  To-day she looked splendid.

I had arranged this ride along with her for a purpose, and the readiness wherewith she had concurred in the arrangement might have meant nothing, but I preferred to think the contrary--that she understood my purpose and concurred in it.  I had been here now some months, and we had seen each other daily, and the complete cordiality of our intercourse, with never a hitch, never a jar, so far from waning, had, if possible, increased.  I had resolved to-day to bring matters to a head; yet in the--to me--complete happiness of this our ride together, I seemed to defer anything that might break the charm.  I would leave it to our return ride.  So we chatted on as usual, and gaily, about one thing and another, and then, even if I had wished it otherwise it was too late, for we could see the white tilts of Cape carts and buggies coming from different directions along road and veldt path--riders, too, like ourselves, but all converging upon the common objective.  Then the increasing "whang-whang" of a bell, as we drew nearer to this, seemed to cause a general hurry up on the part of all within sight.

I off-saddled our horses and knee-haltered them, among others performing the same operation; Beryl the while having gone forward to greet the people of the place and other acquaintances, and these were many, for of course everybody knew everybody.  Just as we were going in Trask bore down upon us.

"I say, Miss Matterson, and you, Holt.  Come in front, will you, and help to make a choir.  I'm rounding up as many as I can."

"Not going to have Christmas over again, eh, Trask?"  I said maliciously, the point of which being that Trask, who really did know something about music, and was _ex officio_ organist, or to be more accurate, harmoniumist, had on the occasion referred to undertaken to launch out into anthems and carols and all sorts of things unknown to the multitude: such ambitious soarings, and the letting off of wholly extemporised and weird harmonic fireworks on the instrument, which he called "accompaniment" resulting in the silence, by relays, of the whole body of singers; though not before the latter had ingeniously if unconsciously blended the "Adeste fideles," the "Old Hundredth," "Coming through the Rye," and other historic and popular melodies into one inspiring whole.  It may be readily imagined that of this fiasco Trask did not quickly hear the end, wherefore he liked not my present reference.

"Oh, go to blazes, Holt," he retorted pepperily.  "I'd like to know what you'd have done in my place with such a lot of--of--" and here he was obliged to stop short, remembering that Beryl had been one of the offenders.  She, catching my eye, was thoroughly enjoying the situation.

"All right, Mr Trask," she answered.  "We'll do what we can.  Only you mustn't try and make us do what we can't."

The little plain, whitewashed building--which Stacey had erected on his farm, and was inordinately proud of, and fond of alluding to as "my church"--was nearly full, a thoroughly representative congregation of stock farmers, and their families.  Many, like ourselves, had ridden over, and there was a sprinkling of habits among the feminine section of the gathering, eke a proportion of pretty faces.  But, great Hercules! there was nothing here to come near Beryl.  Looking round, I realised with a glow of pride that, compared with these, she was as a lily among daisies and--she was with me, standing by me, sitting by me, kneeling by me.  It seemed--or I wanted it to seem--as though I had a kind of proprietary interest in her.

Frankly, I own to not being much of a church-goer; far indeed be it from me to cast a slight on those who are.  It is sad, though a fact, but the process--especially in the morning--has a soporific effect.  Yet here, in this little whitewashed building, with the blue sky glimpsed through the open windows, the hum of bees and the strange call of birds in the bush without, wafting in to mingle with the parson's voice and the murmurs of the congregation, I did not feel drowsy in the least.  The graceful habit-clad figure beside me, the profile at which I stole more than one side glance, the sweet true voice, the mere delight of listening to which constituted, I fear, the sole assistance on my part towards Trask's choral aspirations--there was no room for boredom or drowsiness in such proximity; and if this be objected to as a substituting of the creature for the Creator, well, still in my blundering untheological mind I have an idea, which I couldn't express intelligibly to save my life, that on this occasion the influence was something more than a mere earthly one.  But let that pass.

After the service we streamed out into the sunlight, and tongues began to wag on all sides.

"Do persuade your brother to stay and have dinner with us, Miss Matterson," said a voice on the other side of Beryl.  "We can't; and it's much too long for poor little Iris to wait if he persists in taking her back at once.  Of course you'll stay--and Mr Holt."

The speaker was one of the two girls who had made their appearance what time I had got Iris out of the sea at East London, and we had often laughed over it together, and the figure I must have cut.  Then old Stacey came up and seconded the invite so heartily that Beryl gave way. But Brian was as adamant.  He wanted to get back, for several reasons, he said.  Beryl and I knew more than one of them at any rate.  As a matter of fact, Brian was a bit of a misogynist.  He detested fooling around among a pack of women, he used to say; and the Stacey girls he held in particular aversion, which was ungrateful of him, as they happened to cherish a scarcely disguised admiration for his unappreciative self.  So George and poor little Iris were carried summarily off, greatly to the disgust of the latter.

We who remained made ourselves festive enough.  Old Stacey, though somewhat shaky over his aspirates, was not half a bad old sort, and the girls showed to far the best advantage in their own home.  They made themselves exceedingly pleasant to Beryl and myself, and if they had a way of bracketing us together, so to say, it was by no means displeasing to me, for I had got into a way myself of feeling a sort of proprietary right in her, when we were among other people.  If she noticed this, assuredly she could not have resented it; at times I would even let myself think she unconsciously reciprocated it.  She would often refer to me upon some debated matter, for instance, as if mine was the opinion which rendered it final.

We took leave of our entertainers a couple of hours before sundown, in great good humour with ourselves and all the world.  A misgiving had at one time seized me lest Trask should inflict himself upon us, as at any rate part of our way lay together, but he had taken himself off much earlier--and now we were alone.  Not a soul was in sight, not even a house.  The undulation of the veldt, green and gold in the westering sun, stretching away on either side, was as if deserted by man.  Not by animate Nature, though.  A troop of monkeys skipped across our path, momentarily scaring our horses, and chattering at us from the tree-tops; and bird voices were never still.  Several blue cranes were shambling along just off our way, and the incessant cooing of doves, near and far, blended melodiously with the fair and peaceful evening scene.

Yes, the happiness and peace of the day were upon me, as if this fair scene were an earnest of the happiness and peace which had filled my life of late.  Was it a reflection of that which should continue to irradiate it?  Alas and alas, could I but have foreseen!  Yet what misgiving could strike me then, what foreboding that this day was the last--the very last day of happiness or peace for me, and indeed for others, for a long time to come?

"Well, Kenrick, and what is the subject of that very deep meditation?"

I started.  I had forgotten how long I had been plunged in silence.

"You are," I said.

"Me?"

Her eyes opened wide.  There was the most delightfully alluring little smile, half demure, half mischievous, playing around her lips.  Then, as I took in her whole sweet personality, as I looked at her and thought how the next few moments were to decide whether that sweet and gracious personality were to belong to me for the remainder of our lives, or not--my pulses were bounding and beating at such a rate that I wondered how I should get out even two consecutive and coherent words.  Yet it must be done, now and here.

"Listen, Beryl," I began.  "There is something I want you to hear, and that you must hear.  I--"

"Hullo!  Hi, you good people!  Hold on a bit and give us a chance to come up."

And that infernal Trask came clattering upon our heels, having spotted us from the road which led from his place.  Well, there was an end of everything.  My opportunity was gone--for that day, at any rate; and I hold a superstition to the effect that opportunities have a way of not recurring.

"Thought I'd ride over and make an evening of it at your place, Miss Matterson," he rattled on.  "A man gets a bit hipped sometimes all by himself, you know.  So glad I fell in with you like this."

Beryl answered sweetly that so were we, and that they were always glad to see him, and so forth.  While I--well, at that moment I could cheerfully have murdered Trask with my own hand.