CHAPTER TWO.

A WAIF.

"Seems to be coming to, don't he?"

"Not quite.  Better leave him alone a bit longer."

Was I dead, and were these voices of another world?  Hardly.  They had a homely and British intonation which savoured too much of this one.  Then I grew confused, and dozed off again.

Was I dreaming, or where was I? shaped out the next thought as I heard the voices again.  Lying with closed eyes, returning consciousness began to assert itself.  A certain heaving movement, which could be produced by nothing else than a ship at sea, made itself felt--a movement not unknown to me, for I had made a voyage to Australia and back earlier in my hitherto uneventful career--and a pounding, vibrating sound, which jarred somewhat roughly upon my awakened nerves, told that the vessel was a steamship.  Opening my eyes drowsily, I saw that I was lying in a bunk, and the fresh air blowing in through an open skylight was breezy and salt.  There was no mistaking my present quarters.  I was in a ship's cuddy.  A table, covered with a faded cloth of many colours, stood in the middle of the room, and the slant of an apparently useless pillar running from floor to ceiling, and through the same, could only be that of a mast.

"Feeling better now, sir?"

Two men had glided into the room and were watching me.  One was tall, slim, and well made, with a clear-cut face and dark pointed beard, the other red and broad and burly; and when they spoke I recognised the voices I had heard before.

"Yes, thanks.  At least I think so," I answered faintly.

"Better give him a tot of rum.  That'll bring him to," said the broad red man, in a voice that rumbled.

"Not much.  Grog on top of that whack on the head he got would be the death of him.  Oh, steward! tell the doctor to send along that broth," he called out to some one outside.

"Where am I?" was my next and obvious question.

"Board the _Kittiwake_, bound for East London.  Cargo, iron rails," answered the broad red man.

"Let's see.  You ran me down, didn't you?"  I said confusedly.

"Run you down?  Well, sonny, you lurched your ironclad against our bows in a way that was reckless.  And you warn't carrying no lights neither, which is clean contrary to Board o' Trade regulations, and dangerous to shippin'."

"What a narrow squeak I must have had.  Are you the captain?"

"No, sir.  This here's the captain, Captain John Morrissey," and he turned to the good-looking, dark-bearded man, whom at first I had taken for the ship's surgeon.

"Narrow squeak's hardly the word for it, Mr Holt," said this man in a pleasant voice.  "It's more of a miracle than I've seen in all my experience of sea-going.  Ah, I see the doctor has sent you your broth; you'd better take it, and I wouldn't talk too much just yet, if I were you."

"You carry a doctor, then.  Are you a liner?"

Both laughed at this.

"No, no, Mr Holt," answered the captain.  "Doctor's a seafaring term for the ship's cook, and I believe in this instance you'll find his prescriptions do you more good than those of the real medico."

I sipped the broth, and felt better; but still had a very confused, not to say achy, feeling about the head, and again began to feel drowsy.

"I suppose I'll be all right by the time we get in," I said.  "Right enough to land, shan't I?"

The broad red man rumbled out a deep guffaw.  The captain's face took on a strange look--comical and warning at the same time.

"You'll be all right long before we get in, Mr Holt," he said.  "Now, if you take my advice, you'll go to sleep again."

I did take it, and I must have slept for a long time.  Once or twice I half woke, and it seemed to be night, for all was dark save for a faint light coming in through the closed portholes, and the lulling rocking movement and swish of the water soon sent me off again.  Even the throb of the propeller was soothing in its regularity.

"You've had a good sleep, sir.  Feel better this morning, sir?"

It was broad daylight, and the motion of the ship had changed to a very decided roll.  I sat up in my bunk.

"Shall we be in soon, steward?"  I asked, recognising that functionary.

"Be in soon?  Why, hardly, sir," he answered, looking puzzled.  "We don't touch nowhere."

"No, I suppose not.  But where are we now?"

"Well into the Bay."

"The Bay!  What Bay?"

"Bay o' Biscay, sir," he replied, looking as though he thought the effects of my buffeting had impaired my reasoning faculties.

"Bay of Biscay!"  I echoed.  "The Channel, you mean.  The captain said we were bound for East London."

"So we are, sir, and we're heading there at nine knots an hour.  We shan't do so much, though, if this sou'wester keeps up."

An idea struck me, but it was a confused one.

"Steward," I said, sitting bolt upright.  "Will you oblige me with a piece of information.  Where the devil _is_ East London?"

"Eastern end of the Cape Colony, Mr Holt; and a bad port of call, whichever way you take it."

The answer came from the captain, who entered at that moment.  The steward went on with his occupation, that of laying the table for breakfast.

"Great Scott!"  I cried, as the truth dawned upon me.  "But--"

"I see how it stands," said the captain with a smile.  "You thought East London meant the East India Docks.  I didn't set you right at the time, because you might have got into a state of excitement, and rest was the word just then.  Now I think you are fairly on your legs again."

"But--botheration!  I don't want to take a voyage to the Cape.  I suppose you can put me ashore somewhere, so I can get back."

"I'm afraid not.  We don't touch anywhere.  But I think even the voyage is the lesser evil of the two.  Better than lying at the bottom of the Channel, I mean."

"Well, certainly.  Don't think me ungrateful, Captain Morrissey; but this will mean a lot to me.  I shall lose my berth, for one thing."

"Even that isn't worse than losing your life, and you had a narrow squeak of that.  By the way, were you sculling across the Channel for a bet?"

"Haw, haw, haw!" rumbled the broad red man, who had rolled in in time to catch this question.

I joined in the laugh, and told them how I came to be found in such a precarious plight.  Then I learned how my rescue had been effected, and indeed miraculous hardly seemed the word for it.  But that the steamer was going dead slow in the fog, and I had clung to her straight stern with the grip of death, I should have been crushed down beneath her and cut to pieces by the propeller.  Even then they had hauled me on board with difficulty.  The boat, of course, had been knocked to matchwood.

"You had a gold watch and chain upon you, a pocket-book, and some money?" said the captain.  "How much was there?"

"Let me see; five pounds and some change.  I forget how much."

The captain disappeared through a door, and immediately re-entered.

"Count that," he said.

I picked up a five-pound note, two sovereigns, and some silver change.

"Seven pounds, nine and a halfpenny," I said.  "Yes, that's about what it was."

"That's all right.  I took care of it for you.  Here's your watch and chain.  I ventured to open the pocket-book to find out your identity. Now, if you'll take my advice you'll get up and join us at breakfast."

I took it, and soon the captain and I and the broad red man, who was the chief mate, and rejoiced in the name of Chadwick, were seated at table, and I don't know that grilled chops and mashed potato--for the fresh meat supply had not yet run out--ever tasted better.  The while we discussed the situation.

"The nearest point I could land you at would be the Canaries," the captain was saying, "and I daren't do that.  My owners are deadly particular, and it might be as much as my bunk was worth--and I've got a family to support."

"Well, I haven't," I answered, "so I wouldn't allow you to take any risk of the kind on my account, captain, even if you were willing to.  But-- what about passing steamers?"

The two sailors looked at each other.

"The fact is," went on the captain, "it's blowing not only fresh, but strong.  The glass is dropping in a way that points to the next few days finding us with our hands all full.  After that we shan't sight anything much this side of the Cape, and it'll hardly be worth your while to tranship then.  I'm afraid you'll have to make up your mind to do the whole passage with us."

I recognised the force of this, and that it was a case of resigning myself to the inevitable.  And the thought ran through my mind how strange are the workings of events.  But for my brother's invite I should have been safe and snug and humdrum in my City office.  But for the cancelling of that invite I should never have found my way to Whiddlecombe Regis, or even have heard of such a place; and now here I was, after a perilous experience, launched upon the high seas, bound for a distant colony, and that without any will of my own in the matter. Well, when I got there, I could always arrange a return passage.  I had some means of my own--not enough to keep me without working, unless I chose to live upon what would amount to the wages of an artisan. Therefore there was nothing to cause me serious anxiety, unless it were that my berth would probably be filled up.  But, as I have hinted, the tenure of it was somewhat precarious, so some consolation lay that way, and I could doubtless find another.  So I reasoned, forgetting that after all we are blind and helpless instruments in the hands of Fate, a lesson which my experience so far might well have reminded me--certainly in total unconsciousness of what stirring experiences, perilous and otherwise, lay between now and when I should once more behold the English coastline.

"You seem a good sailor, at any rate, Mr Holt," said the captain, breaking in upon my meditations.

"Why, I never thought of feeling seasick," I answered.  "It didn't occur to me."

"No?  Well, you're all right then.  If we've done, I would suggest a turn on deck.  If we get a bad blow, you may not be able to get there for a while, so better make the most of it now."