CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

IN COURT.

Shattuck, C.C. and R.M., was not a genial type of Civil servant, in that he was cold and short of manner, and always intensely official. Moreover, he was popularly credited with a strong native bias, which alone was sufficient to constitute him a round peg in a square hole, in a frontier magistracy such as Fort Lamport.  Personally, he was a middle-aged man with a high bald forehead, and wearing a light full beard--would have been a good-looking one but for a normally acid expression of countenance.

Poor George stood limply in the dock, all the cheek taken out of him, as Brian and I had laughingly told him, as we tried all we knew to hearten him up just before he was placed there.  Indeed, there were not wanting those who thought ill of the magistrate's curt refusal of our attorney's application to allow him to stand beside his father throughout the preliminary examination, on account of his youth.

"I cannot make such exceptions as that, Mr Pyle," had been the answer. "Had it been the case of a native no such application would have been made."

This, by the way, was the sort of remark which did not precisely tend to enhance Shattuck's popularity.

The Courthouse was a dingy, stuffy little enclosure, and it was crowded to overflowing, the back part of the room, usually occupied by natives, being closely packed with dark faces and rolling eyeballs; but scattered among the townspeople was a large number of stock farmers, many of whom had travelled considerable distances in order to render the Mattersons a kind of moral support.

The first called was the District Surgeon, who made a post-mortem of the two bodies.  The deceased, he deposed, were boys of about fifteen or sixteen, as far as he could judge.  Then he proceeded to technical detail, such as the number of shot-wounds in each, when and where placed, and so forth.  As to the other two who were wounded, he, the District Surgeon, could not say they were out of danger yet.  Their injuries were undoubtedly severe.

Then followed, severally, the three or four boys who had been in the company of those shot, and at the time.  These gave their version of the affair pretty much as George had given his.  He had abused them for being there, they said, and ordered them away.  They laughed at him, and he called out that if they did not go at once he would shoot them.  He was pointing his gun at them at the time, and the next thing they knew was that it went off and four of them were lying on the ground.  The remainder ran away.

The tale of each tallied, but Pyle, the attorney who was watching the case on behalf of George, after a bit of a wrangle with the Court interpreter as to the exact shade of meaning which the order to move on would or would not bear in the native vernacular, fastened upon two points in cross-examination.  One was the distance between the slayer and slain, but there was no room for doubt here.  He was on the top of the cliff while they were beneath it.  But it was not a high one.  How high?  As high as the Court room?--Higher, perhaps twice as high. Obviously any one shooting at that short distance would be shooting to kill, not merely to frighten.  Even a boy who was accustomed to firearms, like George was, and however careless, could be under no mistake on that head.  This to dispose of any idea that he had intended merely to "pepper" the deceased without intent seriously to wound.

The other point upon which our attorney harped was the demeanour of the accused.  Was he angry when he ordered them away?--Yes.  He said they were spoiling his hunt.  Did they seriously think he meant to shoot them when he threatened to?--Well, they didn't know.  But if anybody points a gun at you and you think he means to shoot you, you don't stand still and laugh at him?--_Whau_!  They hadn't thought of it in that light. No, they supposed he had not intended to shoot.  Then it had been an accident?--Yes, they supposed so.

All this was put by Pyle to the witnesses in due order, and they were unanimous in their answers.  Pyle was radiant.  During the slight commotion of finding the next witness he leaned back and whispered to us--

"He'll be discharged.  Even Shattuck can't send him for trial on top of that admission."

All the same, we were not quite so sure.

Then was led a good deal of Kafir evidence, that of parents and other relatives of the dead boys, but this dealt mainly with identification, and was of little or no value for or against our side.  It was tediously drawn out too by reason of the interpreting, and was not completed by the time the Court adjourned for lunch.

"Buck up, old chap," said Pyle, going over to poor George, who was not allowed to leave with us.  "Buck up.  You'll be having it with your governor next grub time."

"Thanks, Mr Pyle, but I don't believe I shall," was the doleful reply as he was taken into the chief constable's room to devour some sandwiches which Beryl had sent him.

As we passed out of the dingy hall into the glare of the sunlight, the contrast was a relief.  It was good to be out in the open air again, but the contrast was sharper as we thought of the poor boy we had just left. What if imprisonment, even for a comparatively short time, was before him?

The native end of the Courthouse had emptied out its malodorous crowd, but this was nothing to the number of those who had been unable to gain admission, for to-day the whole township seemed to grow Kafirs, who had come in from near and far by reason of the excitement of the case.  Some were squatting around in groups, lustily discussing it; others lounging around the general stores; while others again were shaping a course for the nearest canteen.  All had sticks, and not a few a pair of them.

"The sooner they pass a bye-law against carrying kerries in the streets the better," said Brian, as we walked over to the hotel.  "There are enough of these chaps here to-day to take the town if they made up their minds.  Hullo!"

The last was evoked by the sound of a great voice haranguing one of the groups we were passing.  Looking round, we recognised Sibuko.

This pestilent savage was squatting on his haunches, holding forth volubly, emphasising his points with a flourish of his kerrie in the air, or bringing it down with a whack on the ground.  But to me he was of secondary interest beside a face in the group that caught my eye.

"Brian, twig that chap three doors off from Sibuko," I said hurriedly. "That's the one who was going to cut my throat in the cave that morning. By Jove!  I wonder if he remembers the knock-out I gave him.  I wouldn't mind repeating it either."

"Well, you can't--not here and now.  In the first place, there are too many of them; in the next, Shattuck would fine you about twenty pounds; and thirdly, we don't want to stir up that stew over again."

The hotel was pretty full, and the first person to catch my eye as we entered the dining-room, rather late, was that infernal Trask, who had calmly appropriated the seat next to Beryl, and which I had mentally marked out for myself.  Moreover, he was in train of trying to be excessively funny, which was his way of keeping everybody's spirits up.

"Hallo, Holt," he sang out.  "Got your seat, I'm afraid.  We'd given you up.  Plenty of room down there, old chap.  By the way, how are things going?"

"Well, we think," I answered curtly, moving to the vacant part at the far end of the room.

"Ha-ha!  Holt seems a bit raggy to-day about something," I distinctly heard Trask say.  "What an uncertain tempered Johnny he is."

But I did not hear Beryl's reply, and--I should have liked to.

We had to hurry back to court again, and, the native evidence concluded, Brian was called to the witness-box.  He deposed to George's return home directly after the tragedy, and how he and I were the first to hear the boy's account of the same, and from that, his first account, he had never swerved in any detail.  Also how he himself had proceeded to the scene of the tragedy in the hope of being of some aid.  Pyle then questioned him about the accused's disposition.  Was he inclined to be careless with firearms?

No, Brian didn't think he was.  All boys were more or less careless about most things.  Whereat a titter ran through the crowd.

Was the accused of a mischievous disposition?

"Not more than most other boys of his age."  And at this the titter became a laugh, causing the magistrate, whose official soul was scandalised, to glance up sharply.

Was he of a passionate or vindictive disposition?

"Not in the least," answered Brian decisively.  "I am as convinced that the whole affair was a sheer accident--the thoughtless pointing of a gun at anybody I don't defend--as I am that I stand here at this moment."

A murmur of applause greeted this remark, and then Brian being done with, I was invited to take his place, but as all that was wanted from me was a mere confirmation of George's first narrative of the affair, I soon got down again.

Septimus Matterson followed.  He was very much affected, but gave his evidence in a sensible straightforward manner that was worthy of all praise.  He told of the irruption of indignant natives on to his place, but without any rancour or ill-will.  As for the accident, no one regretted and deplored it more than he did, unless it was his unfortunate son, and he fully intended, according to Kafir custom in the matter of homicide, to make liberal compensation to the relatives of the slain boys.  As to which he would be glad if the magistrate would allow this to be made known by the interpreter for the satisfaction of the natives at the back of the court.

He had always lived on friendly terms with his Kafir neighbours, he went on when the hum of applause that greeted the last announcement had subsided, and hoped always to do so, in spite of this deplorable accident; several of their chiefs, too, were well known to and esteemed by him and his, and now in this case he had been the first to surrender up his own son to justice.

"That will do, Mr Matterson," said Pyle hurriedly, seeing signs of an utter breakdown.  And he beckoned him from the box.

Then he began a fervid appeal to the Bench.  If all the testimony they had just listened to was worth a jot, he said, it was clear as clear could be that the case was not one of culpable homicide or of manslaughter, but of accidental death.  The evidence of the native witnesses, fair and straightforward as, to their great credit, it had been, made this way, even more if possible than that of the relatives and friends of the accused.  The only eyewitnesses of the tragedy, besides the accused, had frankly admitted when it was put fairly to them, that the lamentable and deplorable affair must have been an accident.

Then he went on to enlarge upon the terrible mental punishment this boy--this mere child--had already undergone, a consciousness which would last far into his after and maturer life, of what one act of carelessness had involved; and having expatiated thus and at some length, concluded by pathetically urging his worship to discharge the accused, and not to add further to his own sufferings and to those of his sorrowing relatives.

There was dead silence as the attorney ended this appeal.  We, and indeed all in the room, took for granted that it would bear fruit, and that George's discharge would follow.  But we reckoned without Shattuck.

"As Mr Pyle has observed," began the magistrate, "this is a painful and deplorable case.  Even an accident may have its culpable features, rendering its perpetrator amenable to the law.  Here two lives have been sacrificed owing to a most culpable piece of thoughtless bravado on the part of the accused, and I should not be doing my duty in summarily discharging him.  It is a case for a judge and jury to decide, and the accused stands committed to the next Circuit Court here."

Then the formality of asking him if he wished to make a statement being gone through, and having been duly cautioned, George, instructed by the attorney, repeated, "It was an accident," and in a scrawling, shaky, schoolboy hand signed his statement.

Then Pyle applied that bail should be granted.  There was plenty of substantial security available, he added.  And at his words at least a dozen men stood up.  But the next words that fell from the Bench were even a greater thunderbolt to us than the decision to commit.

"I cannot grant bail, Mr Pyle."

"Not grant bail, your worship?"

"No.  Not in a case of this nature."

"But there's no more substantial man in the district than the boy's father, your worship."

"I am far from denying it.  But--I cannot grant bail."

Quite an angry murmur ran through the audience at this.  But the magistrate merely looked up.

"Several persons here are committing a very distinct contempt of court," he observed coldly.  "Remove the prisoner."

The poor little chap kept up bravely till he was out of sight.  Then he broke down and fairly howled.

To do Shattuck justice, his apparent hard-heartedness was not without motive, for on the rising of the Court--that is to say immediately, for there were no more cases that day--he asked us to step into his office.

"I am very grieved, Mr Matterson, over the course I have been obliged to take," he began, stiffly and constrainedly, "but I fully believe I am serving your best interests in doing as I have done.  If the boy were given back to you now, would not all the Kafirs around, and Kuliso's people in particular, at once jump to the conclusion that justice had not been done, and that there was one law for the black and another for the white?  In short, I believe his life would be in hourly danger. Their demonstration on your farm seems to point that way, doesn't it? Well now, if they know he is here in prison--I am not going to have him put in an ordinary cell, by the way--they will be to that extent satisfied, and it will give any strong feelings time to die down a bit. The case is out of my hands now.  The records will be forwarded immediately to the Solicitor-General, and of course it rests with him whether the matter goes any further."

There was sound sense in this, and indeed the magistrate had shown a consideration we had not expected from him.  So we parted good friends, and rather arriving at the conclusion that Shattuck was not such a bad sort of fellow after all.