CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

KULISO'S "GREAT PLACE."

Gonya's kloof seemed no longer the same place.  The period of suspense following upon George's committal told upon all of us, seeming to cast a gloom over everything, damping our spirits.  Of myself especially did this hold good, for Beryl was no longer there.  She and Iris had remained in Fort Lamport after the preliminary examination staying with friends, and we three men were alone.

What a difference it made!  During the months I had already spent on the place, Beryl had never been absent for a single day, and now that presence which had rendered the hardest of toil sweet, and irradiated the norm of the daily round with a glow that seemed hardly of earth--to myself, that is--was now removed.  Yet the sun shone just as brightly and the generous riches of Nature expanded around with the same fairness to eye and sense; but--to myself--all lay as beneath the shadow of a cloud.

Many times a day would I recall the keenness of the pang when she had told us of her intention to remain in the town for the present.  The announcement was made in the presence of several persons, or there was no telling how I might have taken it.  As it was, I have a confused recollection of turning on a vacuous grin, and hoping she would enjoy her stay; which was about as idiotic a rejoinder as even I could have been guilty of, considering that a state of anxious suspense would be the family portion for perhaps weeks to come.  Well, she had removed her presence from among us, and to me it seemed that all the savour had gone out of life.  And if this was so during a matter of days or weeks, what would it mean if extended throughout life?

This consideration had rather a maddening effect.  Why had I not boldly tried my chances before, instead of shilly-shallying around until the opportunity had passed?  Our acquaintance was no longer a thing of a day, and as for circumstances, others had started in life--or in a new line, which amounts to the same thing--under far fewer advantages, material, physical or prospective, than I enjoyed, and had made a good thing of it.  That hideous and constitutional reticence of mine had stood in the way, I now saw; yet even then I had been on the point of putting matters to the test on the very day before the tragical event which seemed to have changed the whole course of our daily life, when that infernal Trask had blundered his obtrusive presence in upon us, according to his wont.  Now it was too late.  Obviously under present circumstances the time would be in the highest degree unfavourable.

I have a recollection, too, at that period, of going through sundry phases of insanity.  For instance, I would sit for quite a long time, when in the company of others, and say nothing; the fact being that I was simply giving the rein to thought, of course only in the one direction.  Of this phase I was cured, mainly through the agency of the abominable Trask, whose horse banter and innuendo at such times rendered it difficult to keep my hands off him.  However, it had a tonic effect, in that it caused me to pull myself together.  But I was much addicted to straying in the direction of various spots where Beryl and I had been alone together, and, letting imagination have free rein, would conjure up her sweet bright presence, so alluringly framed by the wild beauty of the surroundings, illumined by the sunlit glow of the cloudless heaven; would go over our conversations together, utterly trivial and unmomentous as such might have been.  To half a hundred other and minor idiocies do I likewise plead guilty; but as I have reason to believe that my lot was by no means singular, and that most of us are fated to undergo a similar stage of imbecility at any rate once in our lives, such belief is fraught with some comfort.

Further, the parlous state into which I had mentally fallen affected my ordinary duties, and what had hitherto been performed with a wholehearted zest now became tedious and wearisome.  That is the worst of physical labour, in that you can _think_ throughout it all.  Here my natural reticence, or caution perhaps, came to the rescue.  I began to wonder whether Brian or his father saw through my state of mind.  If so they gave no sign.  But I must pull myself together; and did so.

I have not unfrequently had occasion to notice how rarely anybody is allowed in this life to suffer from a repletion of contentment over-long.  Here was this household, including myself, leading a life which, in a modest way, left absolutely nothing to wish for: a life of healthful, congenial usefulness, yet, thanks to the characteristics of its individuals, not one of stagnation by any means.  Then this blow had fallen--suddenly, as serious blows generally do.  Even if matters ended at the best we could hope for, the occurrence would leave its mark, and things could not, at any rate for a long time, be just as before.  We three men, left alone, realised a good deal of this.  There was a gloom upon us, checking our usual free flow of conversation, as though we were each and all trying to avoid the topic uppermost in our minds, or at any rate in the minds of two of us.

One day we rode over to Kuliso's "Great Place," to arrange about the compensation to be delivered to the chief for the death of the children, according to native custom.  It was a strange expedition, and one by no means free from danger; for apart from the bad reputation of Kuliso and his clan, there was again unrest on the border--unrest which was deepening day by day, so, although ostensibly unarmed, each of us had a loaded revolver in his right hand pocket.  A strange expedition indeed, its object a barter over the price of human life; and if such failed, what about we three in the midst of hundreds, if not thousands, of brooding savages, in ugly and vindictive mood?  But Septimus Matterson declared he had never been afraid of Kafirs, and did not intend to make a start in that line now.  Yet I, for my part, as we took our way through the Ndhlambe location--with miles of kraals on either hand, studding the veldt far and wide, whose dusky denizens turned out at sight of us, following on our steps near and far to see what went on over at the Great Place--why, I found myself devoutly hoping we might be suffered to return as we had come.

The chief, Kuliso, was a tall, broad, finely built man in the prime of life, with, for a Kafir, quite a heavily bearded face.  It was a strong face, too, with its lofty forehead and air of command, but it was a crafty and unreliable one.  Around him squatted a dozen or so of much older men, grey-bearded and wizened--being, in fact, his _amapakati_, or councillors.  All wore no other clothing than an ample blanket, stained red with ochre, carelessly draped around the body, and for adornment most of them, including the chief, had a splendid armlet of solid white ivory just above the left elbow.  With an eye to artistic effect it occurred to me that the group, with their shrewd dark faces and unconscious grace of attitude, against the background of domed huts, and the increasing groups of Kafirs clustering up from all sides, their reddened frames in contrast against the green of the veldt and the yellow thatch of the huts, would have made no mean subject for the artist's paint-brush.

But little scope was there for the indulgence of artistic imaginings, for the day was destined to be long and trying.  Septimus Matterson, speaking fluently and at length, yes, even pathetically--for I had learned enough of the Xosa tongue by that time to be able to follow him, roughly, through most of his arguments to recognise that much-- recapitulated all the sad circumstances.  If these had brought sorrow to the House of Kuliso, he said, they had hardly brought less to his own house; and Brian and I, listening, were inclined to believe they had brought more.  However, after some further roundabout talk, mostly of an apologetic nature--for savages never appreciate a direct coming to the point--he made them an offer, and one, even under the circumstances, and from their point of custom, of exceptional liberality.

But it was not appreciated, let alone jumped at.  "The sense of the meeting"--to use a civilised and newspaper phrase--was nasty.  The chief, who in actual fact cared no more for the lives that had been taken than had they been those of so many jackals, save that they represented a substantial addition to his own wealth under the current negotiations, held forth in unctuous strain upon the value of life, and the grief of the dead ones' relatives, and so forth, his words being emphasised by deep-toned exclamations from the _amapakati_, which were echoed almost in a shout by the surrounding crowd.  Thus encouraged, he concluded by demanding a payment which would have crippled the Mattersons--well-to-do as they were--seriously for many years.

"This is too much," came the reply, clear and decided, and in the tone of a man who knew he was being grossly imposed upon.  "I have other children besides this one who is now in the hands of the law.  I cannot rob them, and I will not.  Now take this or leave it, for it is all I will give."  And he doubled his original offer.

The jeering hoot that arose among the bystanders died away to silence, for the chief and the _amapakati_ were consulting.  It was a strange scene, this question of barter over human lives--a strange scene, and a weird one.  Some hours had already been spent in the negotiations, and now the sky had become partly overcast, and in the background a great curtain of opaque inky cloud had arisen, against whose blackness jets of lightning were luridly playing, and ever and anon a heavy booming roll. Then in the silence a curious deep drumming sound was heard.  All eyes were turned upward, as overhead flapped several large birds, and in the ungainly black shapes and long sabre-like beaks we recognised the _brom-vogel_, or large hornbill of South Africa, which, by the way, plays its part in native superstitions.  On flapped the birds, slowly winging their way right over the kraal, their deep, heavy note mingling with the approaching thunder roll.  Yes.  It was a strange picture--the unearthly, boding stillness, the livid cloud lit up by lightning gleams, the tall red forms of the clustering barbarians, the upturned eyeballs, the awed hush as some murmured of witchcraft and omens, the chief and councillors grouped in earnest debate, and the background of yellow domes against a dark and angry sky.  There was a tension about it that got upon my nerves, and I said as much to Brian.

He, for answer, got out his pipe, slowly filled and lighted it, then sent a deliberate look upwards and around, as though the state of the weather occupied his sole consideration.  At that moment my glance fell upon one face among the bystanders, and I could only just repress a start, for it was that of the English-speaking rascal whose kind intentions towards myself in the cattle-stealers' den I had so violently and effectually frustrated.  He, of course, had recognised me from the first, but now as our glances met, the glare of hate and menace upon his repulsive countenance deepened, and without taking his gaze from mine he said something to those who stood next him which caused them to regard me too with an expression the very reverse of benevolent.  There was something uncomfortable in the way this fellow kept on turning up--the other day in Fort Lamport, now again here.  I felt sure that he would lay himself out to be even with me for the rough treatment he had met with, though in the first instance he had brought it upon himself, and in the second--well, it was to save my own life.

Now at last the negotiations had come to an end; to our intense relief satisfactorily so.  Kuliso had accepted the terms, only stipulating that a few unconsidered trifles, such as rolls of tobacco, blankets, etc., should be thrown in as _basela_, which was readily agreed to.  Then there was great shaking of hands as the chief and some of his _amapakati_ got up and accompanied us to where our horses were being held for us.

"_Au_!  This is a new white man," said Kuliso, with a grin, enclosing my hand within his sinewy grip.  He was taller than me, and I am not short, and as he thus confronted me, and I took in the fine proportions and strong yet sinister countenance of this great muscular savage, it was with feelings of repulsion and distrust, for all _the_ geniality he was striving to exhibit.  For I had an instinctive idea we should similarly confront one another again, and that under inauspicious circumstances. But how strange and terrible those circumstances were destined to be, I had then little if any idea.