CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

"THERE WERE TWO LIVES."

"They are late--very late.  They ought to be here by now," murmured Beryl, more to herself than to me, as she came out on the stoep, where I was seated alone, admiring the splendid moonlight; "they" being her father and George, who had ridden over to Trask's early in the afternoon about something, intending to be home by supper-time.  Now it was nearly bedtime, and still there was no sign of them.

"Oh, they'll turn up any minute now," I said.  "It's not likely they'll stay the night at Trask's, I suppose?"

"Not in the least likely.  But--I wish they'd come."

Brian was away, Iris too; the latter staying with some people at Fort Lamport--so that Beryl and I were alone together.  But as she dropped into one of the roomy cane chairs beside me, I could see that she had hardly an ear for half my conversation, and her face, clearly visible in the moonlight, wore a strangely anxious and troubled look.  The slightest sound would start her up, listening intently.  I watched her with amazement.

"Why, Beryl," I said.  "What on earth is the reason of all this anxiety? They--all of us--have been out as late as this before?"

"And I have never been as anxious as this before.  Quite true.  But, do you believe in instincts, in presentiments, Kenrick?"

"Well, in a way perhaps.  But--I hardly know.  They are generally to be traced to overwrought nerves, and that's a complaint I should have thought would be the last for you to suffer from, Beryl."

"Yes, it seems strange.  All the more reason why my instinct in this case is a true one.  I feel as if something terrible was about to happen--was happening--and I--we--can do nothing--nothing.  Oh, I can't sit still."

She rose and paced the stoep up and down, then descended the steps and stood looking out into the night.  This sort of thing is catching.  And that Beryl, the courageous, the clear-headed, the strong-nerved, should be thus thrown off her balance, was inexplicable, more than mysterious. Something of a cold creep seemed to steal over my own nerves.  The night was strangely still; warm too for the time of year, by rights it ought to have been sharp and frosty.  Even the intermittent voices of nocturnal bird or insect were hushed, but every now and then the silence would be broken by the dismal moaning and stamping of a herd of cattle gathered round the slaughter place behind the waggon shed.  But these impressions promptly gave way to the love which welled up within me a hundredfold as I gazed into the sweet troubled eyes, for I had joined her where she stood in front of the stoep.

"Dearest, don't give way to these imaginings," I urged.  "They will grow upon you till you make yourself quite ill.  What can there be to fear? Nothing."

Great heavens! my secret was out.  What had I said?  And--how would Beryl take it?

The latter I was not destined to learn--at any rate not then.  The dogs, which had been lying behind the house, uttering an occasional sleepy growl when the moaning, scuffling cattle became too noisy, now leaped up and charged wildly forward, uttering such a clamour as to have been heard for miles.

"Here they are, you see.  I told you they'd be home directly," I said. "And here they are."

But the intense relief which momentarily had lighted up Beryl's face faded, giving way to a look of deepened anxiety and disappointment.

"It is not them at all," she murmured.  "Listen!"

By the sound of their barking, the dogs must have gained the further gate.  The clamour had ceased--suddenly, mysteriously.  Yet, listening intently, we could detect no sound of voices nor yet of hoof strokes, both of which would have been audible a mile or more away in the calm stillness of the night.  Yet, from an occasional "woof" or so, which they could not restrain, we could hear that the dogs were returning.

But their tumult broke forth again, though partially and momentarily. Someone was opening the inner gate.

An exclamation escaped Beryl, low, but intense.  A dark figure came towards us.

"Why, it is Dumela!" she gasped.

"_Inkosikazi_," began the old Kafir, whom we all thought considerably more than a hundred miles away at that moment, if we had thought of him at all, that is.  "_Inkosikazi_.  Where is your father?  I would speak with him, now at once."

"He is not here, Dumela.  He will be, any moment, though."

"_Au_!  I thought not.  I thought not," was the muttered answer.  "And Jojo (George)?"

"He is with his father," said Beryl eagerly.  "Why?"

The old man muttered something quickly to himself.  Then aloud--

"They have not returned?  That is well.  _Inkosikazi_, take horse, and go and tell them the way home is dark to-night--dark, dark.  Let them sleep where they are, and return beneath the sun."

"Dark?"  I interrupted, like an idiot.  "Dark?  Why it's nearly full moon."

Dumela glanced at me impatiently, eke somewhat contemptuously.

"_Au_!" he said.  "I have not been away for nothing.  Why did I leave here?  Why did I fill up the ears of my father with a tale?  Why did I take away my cattle and my wives?  Because the ears of Kuliso are large"--meaning open--"but I wanted mine to be so, too.  So I went no further than the further border of Kuliso's location, giving out that I had a grievance against my father, whose milk and corn I had eaten for nearly the half of my lifetime; giving out, too, that I wanted it not to be known to those I had left, that I was dwelling beneath the shadow of Kuliso.  Then the people of Kuliso feared not to talk within my hearing. Say, _Inkosikazi_, why has not your father--and mine--sent the boy away?"

Beryl's face went ghastly white.

"Why, Dumela," she said.  "The compensation cattle have been paid, and Kuliso has assured us the unfortunate affair was settled.  He is the chief.  We have his word."

"You have his word.  But the fathers of the children have not the compensation cattle--no, not any of them.  Kuliso's hands are large. That which is poured into them does not overflow and fall out.  The fathers of the children who were killed have no compensation, and--the boy was not punished.  Justice--the white man's justice--has not been done, they say.  Why was he still kept here?"

Beryl's face seemed cut out of stone.  She made a step towards the old Kafir, and placed a hand on each shoulder.  They were about the same height, and I saw her grasp tighten, on him, like a vice.

"Attend, Dumela.  Are they in danger now, and where?  Quick, do you hear?  Quick."

"Take the shortest way to the house of the Chatterer (Trask)," he answered, thus directly cornered.  "_Au_! were there not two lives taken, two lives!  And these are two lives."

Almost flinging him from her, Beryl turned to me, and in her face, her tone, her gesture, was a very whirlwind of apprehension, of frenzied despair.

"Kenrick, what horses are in the stable?"

"Fortunately two--yours, Meerkat--and mine."

"Saddle them up, quick.  Get your revolver, and come."

Not long did it take me to obey her behest, and indeed, no sooner had I done so than Beryl herself appeared at the stable door, equipped for our expedition.

Giving no further thought to old Dumela, we fared forth over the moonlit veldt.

"My presentiment was a true one after all, Kenrick," remarked Beryl, as we rode side by side.

"That remains to be seen," I said.  "Old Dumela may have found a mare's nest."

"No.  He would not have come here at this time of night like this without good reason.  And all the time we were thanking him shabby and ungrateful he was serving us--watching over our interests, our safety."

The short cut to Trask's lay along the bottom of a network of intersecting kloofs, but the path would only allow of riding single file.  Beryl and I had a sharp skirmish as to who should take the lead, but I claimed my right, and firmly stuck to it.  If there was danger, mine was the right to discover it and meet it first, and that she recognised.

Heavens! the sickening, creeping mystery of that night ride--the weird, boding awe of it, as we took our way through the dark gloom of overhanging scrub, the sharp contrast of its blackness with the vivid glare of the full moon accentuated tenfold--the ghostly cliffs frowning down upon us, as from a scene in Dante.

Our way took us by the lower end of the Zwaart Kloof, the site of that other tragedy--the scene, too, of my fell and fatal discovery when all my castles in the air had melted away, when I had learned that I was ruined, and as we entered its bushy recesses a thrill of superstitious dread ran through me.  It was an ill-omened spot--cursed and haunted with an overshadowing of woe.  Surely--surely--not again were its shades destined to cover another tragedy--another outpouring of the cup of horror and of evil.

I had but lately avowed my disbelief in instincts, yet here I know not what instinct of dread and repulsion came upon me as we drew near the place, moving me to glance over my shoulder to catch a glimpse of the face of my companion, possibly with the intent to ascertain whether the same idea was moving her.  But as I did so a sudden and violent start on the part of my horse came near unseating me.  Shying, snorting, the brute swerved and backed; and coming thus into collision with Beryl's steed it took both of us some moments to soothe and quiet the animals. But in that brief flash of time I had caught a glimpse of a Something lying on the ground, and my heart stood still within me and every drop of blood in my system seemed to turn to water.

There was no mistaking the nature of that Something.  The inanimate human form is possessed of an eloquence all its own.  Dark upon the shimmer of the moonlit earth this one lay, the white face staring upward to the sky, the face of poor little George Matterson.  And the same instinctive conviction flashed through us both as we slid from our saddles, that it was a dead face.

Never, if I were to live a thousand years, could I forget the whirl of rage and horror and grief that convulsed me at that moment, turning me half-dazed.  Beryl was beside the prostrate form, bending over it.  No cry had escaped her, only a quick, half-stifled gasp.  In a moment I was beside her, having taken the precaution to secure both our horses.

"Dead!" she uttered, having raised the head, with infinite tenderness of touch.  "Dead.  Murdered!"

I don't know which feeling was uppermost within my mind at that moment-- horror at the discovery, or awe of the strange, unnatural calmness wherewith she accepted the frightful and heartrending situation.  I bent down over the poor remains.  A noosed _reim_ had been twisted round the neck, compressing it tightly.  Not this, however, had been the cause of death.  The grass around and beneath the body glistened with a dark wet stain.  On the dead boy's clothing above the heart was a clean cut from which blood was still welling.  He had been stabbed--stabbed with an assegai.

We stood staring into each other's faces, ashy white in the moonlight. It seemed as if our lips refused to frame the question that was in both our minds.  Then, speaking in a harsh, gasping whisper, Beryl said--

"What of--father?"