CHAPTER FOUR.

ON A STRANGE AND DISTANT SHORE.

"Well, good-bye, Holt.  Wish you every luck if I don't see you again, but I expect I shall if you stop on a day or two at the hotel yonder. I'll be getting a run on shore--when I can."

Thus the captain, and then came Chadwick, and the chief engineer--all wishing me a most hearty good-bye.  Even toward the obnoxious King I felt quite affectionately disposed.  The crew too were singing out, "Good luck to you, sir."

I could hardly say anything in return, for I felt parting with these excellent fellows and good comrades, whose involuntary guest I had been during four weeks.  Then I slid down the rope ladder on to the great surf boat which had been signalled alongside to take me off.

There were other vessels in the roadstead, sailing craft and a white-hulled, red-funnelled coasting steamer of the Castle line.  It was a dull, sunless afternoon, which enhanced my depressed and forlorn feeling considerably.  The surf boat was one of several that had been discharging cargo from the other shipping, which was stowed away in her hold, leaving room for me in the very small space open at either end. She was worked by a hawser and half a dozen black fellows, and a very rough specimen of a white man, with a great tangled beard, and a stock of profanity both original and extensive.

"Now, mister," sang out this worthy, as I was waving last farewells to those on board, "stow that--and yer bloomin' carcase too, unless yer want yer ruddy nut cracked with the blanked rope.  Get down into the bottom of the boat."

The warning, though rough, was all needed, for hardly had I obeyed it, when bang--whigge! the great hawser flew taut like some huge bowstring, just where my head had been a moment before.  For a little while I judged it expedient literally to lie low, but when I eventually looked up, it was to behold an immense green wall of water towering aft.  It curled and hissed--then broke upon us with a thunderous crash, and for half a minute I didn't know whether we were in the boat or in the sea; and had hardly time to take breath when another followed.

"Hang on, mister, hang on," bellowed the captain, after the first storm of profanity which burst from him had spent itself.  "Hang on for all you're worth.  There's more coming."

I took his advice.  There was a quick gliding movement, an upheave and a bump--and then--crash came one of the mighty rollers as before.  Another and another followed, and at length, half drowned, I realised we were in smooth water again, and ventured cautiously to look up.

We were in the mouth of a fine river, banked by high bluffs covered with thick virgin forest.  On the left bank lay a township of sorts, and the lighthouse I had seen.  The darkies were warping along merrily now, their skins glistening with their recent wetting.  Behind, lay such a very hell of raging surf as to set me wondering whether we could really have come through it and lived.

"Blanked heavy bar on to-day, mister," said the skipper of the lighter, cramming a pipe from a rubber pouch.  "My word, but you've got a ducking.  Five bob please, for landing you."

I handed over the amount, and asked him about accommodation.

"Keightley's--up yonder," he said.  "That's the only hotel on the West bank.  There's a German shanty a mile or so higher up t'other bank, but you'll be better here.  Going on to `King,' I take it?"

"Where?"

"`King'--King Williamstown," he explained.

I was about to reply that I was a picked-up castaway, but thought better of it in time.  Such would be presumed to be destitute, and thus might find initial difficulties as to accommodation.  So I only answered that that would do me.

Now a most weird noise attracted my attention, and I found that it proceeded from a sight hardly less weird.  Covering a ricketty jetty which we were slowly approaching, a crowd of strange beings were preparing for our reception after their own fashion.  Some were clothed in brick red blankets and some were clothed in nothing, but all were smeared from head to foot with red ochre--and, as they swayed and contorted, a thunder of deep bass voices accompanying the high yelling recitative of him who led the chant, and beat time in measured stamping on the boards, I wondered that the structure did not collapse and strew the river with the lot of them.  But their wild aspect and the grinning and contortions gave me the idea of a crowd of hugely exaggerated baboons in the last stage of drunken frenzy.  But they were not drunk at all.  It was only the raw savage, disporting himself after his own form of lightheadedness.

Up to this time my ideas as to the Kafir of South-Eastern Africa had been vague.  If I had thought of him at all it had been as a meek, harmless kind of black, rather downtrodden than otherwise, and to whom a kick and a curse would constitute a far more frequent form of reward than a sixpence.  But now as I stepped upon the jetty at East London, my views on that head underwent a complete and lasting change.  For these ochre-smeared beings were brawny savages, at once powerful and lithe of frame and with a bold independent look in their rolling eyes, which, although their countenances were in the main good-humoured, seemed to show that they were able and willing to hold their own if called upon to do so.  More than one of the group towered above me, and I am not short. They crowded around, vociferating in their own tongue, and tried to seize the bundle I carried--this, by the way, contained a change of clothing which Morrissey had insisted on my accepting--and I began to think of showing fight, when the surf-boat skipper came to my aid with the explanation that they merely wanted to carry it for me, for a consideration.  But I was glad to get rid of the vociferous musky-smelling crowd--little thinking what strange and wild experiences awaited me yet at the hands of the savage inhabitants of this land, of whom these were fair representatives.  And here I was, thrown up, as it were, upon this inhospitable coast, without a dry stitch of clothing upon me.

Soon I found myself the fortunate possessor of a small whitewashed room in the only "hotel" the place boasted--and its leading features were flies and various weird and unknown specimens of the beetle tribe, both small and great, which, attracted by the light, would come whizzing in, blundering against the greasy flare which had attracted them--to their discomfiture, or into my face--to mine; but at length I fell asleep, to the unintermittent thunder of the surf upon the bar.  But the said sleep was troubled and fitful.  The door, half glazed, was door and window combined, and the night being sultry, this must perforce be left open, and in the result I don't know how many frogs startled me out of my slumbers by a weird, searching croak right at my bedside, but I do know that at least three rats were playing hopscotch upon my counterpane at once.  And these, and other unconsidered trifles, ensured that precious little sleep fell to my lot the first night I passed upon the soil of Southern Africa, whither I had been thrown under so strange and unforeseen a combination of circumstances.