CHAPTER FIVE.

OF AN EARLY ADVENTURE.

I awoke in the morning feeling but poorly rested, and having assimilated an indifferent breakfast, which however was quite passable after four weeks of ship fare, set out to interview the manager of the local branch of the Standard Bank.  I was business man enough to feel misgivings as to any success attending the object of my interview, and so far was justified by results.  The manager--a youngish man, and the usual Scotchman--listened to my story politely enough--sympathetically too. But when it came to hard business, opening an account pending the time I could communicate with my own bankers, the difficulty began.  He did not exactly disbelieve my story: my proposal to bring forward Captain Morrissey in corroboration went far against that.  But then how could Captain Morrissey vouch as to my means?  On my own showing he could by no possibility do so, and indeed to no one, in view of my business experience as aforesaid, did such an argument more fully appeal than to myself.  As to reference home, why, England in those days was over three weeks distant, otherwise seven or eight before an answer could be had. Didn't I know any one locally who could vouch for me?  Of course I didn't--considering the circumstances under which I had found myself here.  Well, he was exceedingly sorry he could not accommodate me--on his own responsibility.  He would, however, refer the matter to the general manager, and would then be only too happy, etc., etc.  And so I was very politely bowed out.

Well, I couldn't blame him.  Business is business, and I might have been just the predatory adventurer he had no proof I was not.  But for all that I went out feeling very disconsolate.  My seven pounds nine and a halfpenny wouldn't last long, and I had already begun to bore into it. What was I to do next--yes--what the devil was I to do next?

I thought I would cross the river for one thing, and take a walk along the shore on the other side.  I believe I had a sort of foolish idea that the mere sight of the _Kittiwake_ lying close in at anchor, constituted a kind of link between other times and my homeless and friendless condition on this strange and far away shore; and some thoughts of shipping on board her as an able seaman, and so working my passage round home, even entered my head.  Anyway, I crossed over on the pontoon, and walking along the bush road which skirted the east bank, at length came out upon the green slope which stretches down to the sandy beach within the bight of the roadstead.

The vessels were riding to their anchorage, and the rattle of swinging out cargo, and the yells and chatter of Kafirs working the surf boats, was borne across the water.  The bar had gone down considerably since the previous day, yet there was still some surf on, and it came thundering up the beach, all milky and blue in the radiance of the unclouded sun--which said sun began to wax uncommonly warm, by the same token.  However, the voyage had inured me to tropical heat, which this wasn't; wherefore I sat down to take a rest, and smoke a pipe.

Now as I sat there, moodily gazing out to seaward, an object caught my eye.  It was beyond the further line of surf, and it looked uncommonly like the head of something swimming.  Yet, who would be fool enough to swim out beyond that line of rollers, with their powerful and dangerous undertow?  Besides, I had heard that sharks were plentiful on that coast.

I stared at the thing as it rose on the summit of a long wave.  Yes, it was a head, and--great heaven! it was the head of a child; the sunlight falling full upon a little white face, and just a glimpse of gold as it touched the head, revealed that much beyond a doubt.  And, as though to add to the mystery of the situation, a cry rang out over the roar of the breakers, which sounded most startlingly like a cry for help.

I was on my feet in a moment.  Not a soul was in sight along the shore. In less than another moment I had thrown off my coat and kicked off my boots, and as I dashed into the surf another cry came pealing through the roar--this time more urgent, more piteous than before.  I shouted in encouragement and then it required all my strength and experience in the water to get through that hell of boiling breakers, and avoid being rolled and pounded and thrown ignominiously back half drowned.  Were it not indeed that I am a strong swimmer, and, what is better still, thoroughly at home in the water, such is precisely what would have happened.

A horrible fear came upon me as I got beyond the broken line.  Was I too late?  Then the object of my search rose upon the wave within a few yards of me.

It was, as I had thought, the face of a child--of a pretty little girl of twelve or thirteen.  She wore a blue bathing dress, which allowed plenty of freedom for swimming, and her golden-brown hair was gathered in a thick plait.  But in the large blue eyes was a look of terror, a kind of haunted look.

"Here, you're all right now," I shouted as I reached her.  "Don't be scared.  Lean on me, and rest.  Then we'll swim in together.  Hold on to my shoulder now.  That's right."

The little one seemed exhausted, for she could hardly gasp out--

"We must go in quick.  Sharks--two of them--after me," and again she stared wildly over her shoulder with that terrified and haunted look. And indeed a very uncomfortable feeling came over myself, for there I was, over a hundred yards from shore, treading water, with a badly frightened child hanging on to my shoulder, the breakers in front and this other peril behind.

Peril indeed!  Seldom, if ever, have I known such a chilling of the blood as that which now went through my frame.  A black glistening object was sliding through the water, five-and-twenty yards away, perhaps less--a rakish triangular object, with which I was familiar enough by that time to identify as the dorsal fin of a shark, and a large one too.  And, great heaven! even nearer still on the other side was another of those dreadful glistening fins.

"We'll scare them effectually," I said, with a hollow and ghastly grin of assumed levity.  And springing half out of the water I emitted a most fiendish yell, while falling back again with a mighty splash.  It was effective, for the two hateful objects sheered off, gliding away a short distance--but only a short distance.

"Come now," I said, making a most prodigious splashing.  "We must get in.  Swim with me.  Hold my hand if you are tired."

"No, I'm all right now," said the plucky little thing, beginning to strike out quite easily and naturally.  Then I saw her face pale, and she stole a quick, terrified look over her shoulder, and I felt mine do ditto.  For there--keeping pace with us, one on each side, and about the same distance at which we had first sighted them, moved the two horrors. They were trying to get ahead of us, to cut us off before we could reach the broken water, wherein they dare not venture.

I once knew a man who had escaped from the foundering of the ill-fated _Birkenhead_, and he attributed his exemption to the fact that time had lacked wherein to divest himself of his clothing before starting to swim ashore--for two sailors, who had been able to strip, were pulled under, one on each side of him.  And now this idea flashed a wonderful hope into my mind, for I was almost fully clothed and my little companion wore a bathing dress.  But her strokes were quick and spasmodic, and she panted.  Terror was sapping her natural confidence in the water.

"This won't do," I cried in a loud hectoring voice.  "Keep cool, can't you, and don't be a little idiot."

The bullying tone told, as I intended it should.  The look she gave me was amusingly resentful and contemptuous.  But she ceased to swim wildly.  At the same time our slimy enemies increased their distance, doubtless alarmed at the sound of my voice, which I also intended.  To my unspeakable and heartfelt relief we were now on the upheave of the curling combers, and those horrible fins were still behind.

But we were not out of the wood yet--no, not by any means; for here before us lay a peril almost as formidable in itself.  My little companion swam gracefully and with ease, but when we came within the breakers I kept tight hold of her, and indeed such precaution was needed, for she began to regain her terrors as the huge combers whirled us high in the air, to throw us, half smothered into a hissing cauldron of milky foam.  However, they threw us forward, and by using my judgment I managed so that we should ride more and more in on the crest of each roller.  And the undertow at the very last proved the most difficult of all to withstand, and twice we were dragged irresistibly backward, to be pounded by the breaking thunder of the next onrushing comber.  At last we were through, and I believe but for the incentive afforded by the very act of saving life, I should have collapsed--anyway, the child could never have gained that beach unaided.

We stood, panting and dripping, and looking at each other for some moments.  Then I said, as I pulled on my boots--

"Well, young lady, you seem to have had something of a swim.  Where did you go into the water, and what on earth made you venture out so far, may I ask?"

She explained that she was staying at a seaside camp whose tents were pitched just beyond a few rocks a little way further on.  The water was sheltered there, and there was no difficulty in getting a smooth swim. But she had somehow got too far to the right, and just as she was turning to come in again, she had seen the triangular fin of a shark cleaving the surface at no great distance, and coming towards her--then another, much nearer.  This, together with the knowledge of the distance necessary to return, unless she could try to land through the surf, had unnerved and flurried her, resulting in exhaustion.

"Well, I believe it's jolly lucky for you I happened to be at hand," I said reprovingly.  "Now, don't you go running any such silly risks again, or you may not get off so easily.  You'd better cut back now, and get dressed, or you'll catch cold."

"No fear.  The sun's much too hot for that," she answered, laughing up into my face.

She was, as I have said, a pretty child, with large blue eyes and a clear skin somewhat sun-tanned.  She had a pretty voice too, and spoke with a peculiar intonation, not unpleasing, and a little way of dipping the letter "r" where it occurred to end a word--which I afterwards found was the prevailing method of speech among most of those born in the Cape Colony.

I picked up my hat and coat intending to see her safely, at any rate until within sight of her people.

"What's your name?"  I said, as we walked along, at first in silence.

"Iris."

"Iris--what?"

But before she could answer, two girls appeared round the pile of rocks, which we had nearly gained.  They looked startled at seeing me, then scared, and no doubt I looked a little wild, for a rational white man walking along the beach in soaked and dripping clothes was not an everyday object.  Then they advanced shyly and somewhat awkwardly, and it occurred to me that they did not look quite the equals in the social scale of my little friend.

The latter whispered to me, hurriedly and concernedly.

"Don't tell them anything about me--about finding me as you did.  I shall never be allowed to go into the water again.  Don't tell them. Promise you won't."

What could I do but give the required promise?  Then the little one, with a hurried good-bye, skipped off to join the two, who were awaiting her--rather awkwardly--at a little distance off.

"Ungrateful little animal!"  I thought to myself.  "She would never have seen land again but for me--that's as certain as that she's on it now."

Child-like, her first thought had been for herself--smothering even the barest expression of thanks.  I did not want to be thanked for saving her little life, still I thought she might have shown a trifle more appreciation, child though she was.  And as I wended my way back, my clothes fast drying on me under the powerful rays of the midday sun, another and a meaner thought struck me, begotten, I hope, of my lonely and forlorn condition.  I did not want gratitude; still, the incident might have availed to make me friends of some sort in this strange and far away land, and of such I had none.

In a state of corresponding depression, I sat down to dinner.  There were two other men present, rough specimens of the small agricultural class, who performed marvellous feats of attempted knife swallowing; and as I divided my energies between keeping off the swarming flies and taking in the necessary sustenance, I began to wonder what on earth I should do to get a living until the two months necessary to hear from England had elapsed.  Indeed, I began almost to regret my steady refusal of Captain Morrissey's proffered loan; for that prince of good fellows had been really hurt because I had refused to borrow a ten pound note from him--which, he said, was most of what he had with him; but what did he want with money anyhow then, he urged, being on board ship all the time?

"Say, mister!" said a voice in my ear, accompanied by a characteristically familiar touch on the shoulder.  "There's a gentleman asking for you."

I looked up and beheld the frowzy, perspiring barkeeper, in his usual shirt-sleeves.  A visitor for me?  Why, Morrissey, of course--or was it the bank manager come to say he had thought better of his refusal, and I could open an account within modest limits right there?  The grimy barkeeper seemed as an angel with a message as I followed him somewhat hastily to the front room.  Then disappointment awaited.  The room contained neither of these, but one stranger, and him I didn't know from Adam.