CHAPTER SIX.

OF THE UNEXPECTED.

The stranger, who was looking out of the window, turned as I entered, and I saw a tall good-looking young fellow, some three or four years my junior.

"Don't you know me?" he said, with a smile.

"I'm afraid I don't," I answered, feeling thoroughly puzzled, and the thought flashed through my mind he must be some relative of the child I had rescued.

"I wondered if you would," he went on.  "I'm Matterson--Brian Matterson. We were at old Wankley's together."

"By Jove!  Why, so it is.  I'm awfully glad to meet you.  It's small wonder if I didn't know you again, Matterson.  You were a youngster then, and it must be quite a dozen years ago, if not more."

"About that," he answered; and by this time we were "pump-handling" away like anything.

"How on earth did you find me out, though?"  I asked.  "I don't know a soul in the land."

"That's just it.  I got on your spoor by the merest fluke.  Was in at the bank this morning on business, and while I was yarning with Marshbanks I saw your card lying on the table.  That made me skip, I can tell you, for I thought there couldn't be two _Kenrick_ Holts; if it had been Tom or George, or any name like that, of course it wouldn't have been so certain.  Marshbanks said you had called on him not very long before me, and he was sorry to have to disappoint you, because you looked a decent sort of chap; but still, biz was biz."

"Oh, I don't blame him in the least," I said.  "I fully recognise that maxim myself."

"Well, I told him if you were the chap I thought, he need raise no further _indaba_ about accommodating you, because I'd take the responsibility.  So we'll stroll round presently and look him up, and put the thing all right."

"Awfully good of you, Matterson.  In fact, you've no idea what running against you like this means to me, apart from the ordinary pleasure of meeting an old pal.  Did the manager tell you how I got here?"

"Yes, and it struck me that a shipwrecked mariner leaving home suddenly like you did might have come, well--hum!--rather unprepared, so I lost no time in putting you right with Marshbanks.  And now, what are your plans?"

"Why, to get back home again."

"I wouldn't hurry about that if I were you.  Why not come and stay with us a bit?  The governor'll be delighted, if you can put up with things a bit plain.  We can show you a little of the country, and what life on a stock farm is like.  A little in the way of sport too, though there's a sight too many Kafirs round us for that to be as good as it ought."

"My dear chap, I shall be only too delighted.  You can imagine how gay and festive I've been feeling, thrown up here like a stranded log, not knowing a living soul, and with seven pound nine and a halfpenny--and that already dipped into--for worldly wealth until I could hear from home."

"By Jove!  Is that all?  Well, it's a good job I spotted your card on Marshbanks' table."

"Here, we'll have a drink to our merry meeting," I said, rapping on the table by way of hailing the perspiring barman aforesaid.  "What's yours, Matterson?"

"Oh, a French and soda goes down as well as anything.  Only, as this is my country, the drinks are mine too, Holt.  So don't put your hand in your pocket now.  Here's luck!  Welcome to South Africa."

We had been schoolfellows together, as Brian Matterson had said, but the three or four years between our ages, though nothing now, had been everything then.  I remembered him a quiet, rather melancholy sort of boy on his first arrival from his distant colonial home, and in his capacity of new boy had once or twice protected him from the rougher pranks of bigger fellows.  But he had soon learned to take his own part, never having been any sort of a fool, and, possibly by reason of his earliest training, had turned out as good at games and athletics as many bigger and older fellows than himself.  We had little enough to do with each other then by reason of the difference in our ages, yet we might have been the greatest chums if the genuine cordiality wherewith he now welcomed me here--in this, to me, distant and strange country--went for anything.

We strolled round to the bank, and the manager was full of apologies, but I wouldn't hear any, telling him I quite understood his position, and would almost certainly have acted in the same way myself.  Then, our business satisfactorily disposed of, Brian and I went round to a store or two to procure a little clothing and a trunk, for my wardrobe was somewhat scanty.  But such things as I could procure would not have furnished good advertisements for a first-rate London tailor or hosier.

"Don't you bother about that, Holt," Brian said.  "You don't want much in the way of clothes in our life.  Fit doesn't matter--wear and comfort's everything."  And I judged I could not do better than be guided by his experience.

We were to start early the next morning, and had nearly two days' drive before us.  This was not their district town, Brian explained to me; indeed, it was the merest chance that he was down here at all, but his father and a neighbour or two had been trying the experiment of shipping their wool direct to England, and he had come down to attend to it.  He was sending the waggons back almost empty, but we would return in his buggy.  At my suggestion that my surprise visit might prove inconvenient to his people he simply laughed.

"We don't bother about set invites in this country, Holt," he said. "Our friends are always welcome, though of course they mustn't expect the luxury of a first-class English hotel.  You won't put us out, so make your mind quite easy as to that."

Late in the afternoon we parted.  Brian was due to drive out to a farm eight or ten miles off--on business of a stock-dealing nature--and sleep, but it was arranged he should call for me in the morning any time after sunrise.

There is a superstition current to the effect that when things are at their worst they mend, and assuredly this last experience of mine was a case confirming it.  An hour or so ago here was I, stranded, a waif and a stray, upon a very distant shore, a stranger in a strange land, wondering what on earth I was going to do next, either to keep myself while in it or get out of it again.  And now I had all unexpectedly found a friend, and was about to set forth with that friend upon a pleasure visit fraught with every delightful kind of novelty.  There was one crumple in the rose-leaf, however.  We were starting early the next morning, and I should have no opportunity of seeing Morrissey and my excellent friends of the _Kittiwake_ again.  I went round to the agents, however, and inquired if there was no way of sending any note or message to the ship, and was disgusted to find that there was none that day. The bar had risen again in the afternoon, and there was no prospect of any one from the shipping in the roadstead coming ashore.  So I left a note for the captain, expressing--well, a great deal more than I could ever have told in so many words.

I was up in good time next morning, and had just got outside of a muddy concoction whose principal flavour was wood-fire smoke, and was euphemistically termed coffee, when Brian Matterson drove up in a Cape cart.

"Hallo, Holt," he sang out.  "You're in training early.  You see, with us a fellow has to turn out early, if only that everybody else does, even if he himself has nothing particular to do.  Well, in this case I might have given you a little longer, because I've got to pick up a thing or two at the store, and it won't be open just yet, and then my little sister's coming to have a look at me at the pontoon by way of good-bye.  She's staying with some people down here at a seaside camp--I brought her down when I came four days ago--and wants to say good-bye, you know.  She's a dear little kid, and I wouldn't disappoint her for anything.  Now trot out your luggage, and we'll splice it on behind."

We got hold of a sable myrmidon who was "boots" and general handyman about the place, a queer good-humoured aboriginal with his wool grown long and standing out like unravelled rope around his head, and having hauled out my new trunk, bound it on behind the trap with the regulation raw hide _reim_.  Then we thought we might as well have some breakfast before starting, and did.

It was about seven o'clock when we started, but the sun's rays were already manifest, even through the shelter of the canvas awning.  The horses, a pair of flea-bitten roans, were not much to look at, being smallish, though sturdy and compact, but in hard condition, and up to any amount of work.  We picked up some things at the store, and then it seemed to me we had hardly started before we pulled up again.  There was the white of a sunshade by the roadside, and under it the flutter of a feminine dress.  I recognised one of the girls who had come out to meet the little one to whose aid I had so opportunely come the day before, and--great heavens!--with her was my little friend herself.

"Hallo, Iris," sung out Brian Matterson.  "Get up, now; I've got to take you back.  Just had a note from Beryl to say you re to go back at once. Jump up, now."

The little one laughed, showing a row of white teeth, and shook her pretty head.

"No fear," she replied.  "Keep that yarn for next time, Brian."  Then, catching sight of me, she started and stared, reduced to silence.  The while I was conscious of being introduced to Miss Somebody or other, whose name I couldn't for the life of me catch, and, judging from the stiff awkwardness wherewith she acknowledged the introduction, I was sure she could not catch mine.  Then, in answer to some vehement signalling on the part of the child, Brian got down and went a little way with her apart, where the two seemed immersed in animated conversation, leaving me to inform the awkward girl that it was a fine morning and likely to continue hot, and to indulge in similar banalities.

Brian reascended to his seat, and relieved me of the reins.  I, the while, faithful to my plighted word, showed no sign of ever having seen the child before, seeming indeed to see a certain reminder of the same in her sparkling pretty little face as she half-shyly affected to make my acquaintance.  Brian kissed her tenderly, and we drove on.  But before we had had gone far he turned on me suddenly.

"Holt, I don't know how to thank you, or what to say.  I've just heard from Iris what you did yesterday.  Man, you saved her life--her _life_, do you hear?--and what that means to me--to us--why, blazes take it, you've seen her!--I don't know how I can convey the idea better."

He was all afire with agitation--indeed, to such an extent as to astonish me, for I had set him down as rather a cool customer, and not easily perturbed.  Now he continued to wax eloquent, and it made me uncomfortable.  So I endeavoured to cut him short.

"All right, old chap.  It isn't worth jawing about.  Only too glad I was on hand at the time.  Besides, nothing at all to a fellow who can swim. I say, though, I was admiring the way the little girl was at home in the water; still, she's small, and those beastly breakers have a devil of an undertow, you know.  She oughtn't to be allowed out like that with nobody to look after her."

"That's just it.  But she bound me to secrecy, like she did you, for fear of not being allowed in again.  I made her promise not to do it again though, as a condition of keeping dark."

And then he went on to expatiate on Miss Iris' swimming perfections, and indeed every other perfection, to an extent that rather prejudiced me against her if anything, as likely to prove a spoilt handful.  However, it got him out of the gratitude groove, which was all I wanted just then.

That couple of days' journey was quite one of the most delightful experiences of my life.  Our way lay over beautiful rolling country dotted with flowering mimosa, and here and there intersected with a dark forest-filled kloof; and bright-winged birds flashed sheeny from our path, and on every hand the hum of busy insects made music on the warm air.  Yes, it was warm; in the middle of the day very much so.  But the evening was simply divine, in its hushed dewiness rich with the unfolding fragrance of innumerable subtle herbs, for we took advantage of a glorious moon to travel in the coolness.  Now and again we would pass a large Kafir kraal, whose clustering beehive-shaped huts stood white in the moonlight, and thence an uproar of stamping and shouting, accompanying the rhythm of a savage song, showed that its wild denizens were holding high festivity at any rate; and the sound of the barbarous revel rising loud and clear upon the still night air, came to me with an effect that was wholly weird and imposing.

"Seems as if I had suddenly leaped outside civilisation altogether," I remarked as we passed one of these kraals, whose inhabitants paused in their revelry to send after us a long loud halloo, partly good-humoured, partly insolent.  And I gave my companion the benefit of my preconceived notions of the Kafir, whereat he laughed greatly.

"It's funny how these notions get about, Holt," he said.  "Now you have seen a glimpse of your meek, down-trodden black--only he's generally red--since you landed, and you can the more easily realise it when I tell you he'd cut all our throats with the greatest pleasure in life if he dared.  There are enough of them to do it any night in the year; but, providentially, there's never any cohesion among savages, and these chaps won't trust each other, which is our salvation, for they simply swarm as to numbers.  What do you say?  Shall we outspan and make a night of it on the veldt?  There's an accommodation house a mile or so further on, but it's a beastly hole, and the people none too civil."

Of course I voted for camping, and as Brian's forethought had provided a supply of cold meat and bread and cheese, as well as a bottle of grog, we fared (relatively) sumptuously, and thereafter the last thing I knew was my first pipe dropping out of my mouth very soon indeed after I had lighted it.

We inspanned early the next morning, and as we progressed our way became more hilly.  Thick bush came down to the road in many places, and twice we forded a drift of a river, whose muddy and turbid current rose to the axles.  The high broken country, copiously bush-clad, was delightful to the eye, but oh, the heat of the sun in those scorching valley bottoms, where, when we were not jolting over uneven masses of stone, were wallowing painfully through inches and inches of thick red dust.  Now and then we would pass a string of transport waggons, or a traveller on horseback, and in the middle of the day we outspanned at a farm of the rougher kind.  Towards evening we entered a long, wild, beautiful valley resonant with the cooing of doves and other sounds of evening peace, the bleating of homing flocks and the lowing of cattle; and as we rounded a bush-clad spur and a homestead came into view I felt no surprise that Brian Matterson should turn to me with the remark--

"Here we are at last, Holt; and there's Beryl, on the look-out for us."