CHAPTER SEVEN.

BERYL.

He reined up the Cape cart at the gate of a picturesque verandah-fronted house which stood against a background of wild and romantic bush scenery.  Not for this, however, had I any eyes at that moment; only for the personality which was framed as it were within a profusion of white cactus blossoms which overhung the garden gate.

"Well, Beryl!" he sang out, as we got out of the trap.  "Here's an old school chum I picked up by the merest fluke down at East London.  I brought him out here to see a little African life, so for the present I'll hand him over to you.  Give him a cool chair on the stoep, and a ditto drink, while I go and see to the outspanning, and to things in general.  Dad still away, I suppose?"

"Yes.  He'll be back this evening, though.  I'm expecting him every minute."

"So long, then."

Now I have already explained that I am by nature a reticent animal, and may add that I have a sneaking horror of being taken for a susceptible one.  Wherefore I had refrained from questioning Brian on the way hither, as to the outward appearance or inner characteristics of his elder sister, and he, while mentioning the fact that he had another sister, who kept house for them--for their mother was long since dead-- and a younger brother, had not entered into details.

But it would be idle to pretend I had not been indulging, and that mightily, in all sorts of speculation upon the subject, and that within my own mind.  Would she resemble the little one to whose aid I had come--prove a grown-up replica of her?  If so, she would be something to look at, I concluded.  Yet, now that I beheld her, my first impression of Beryl Matterson was a strange mingling of interest and disappointment.  Tall and very graceful of carriage, she stood there, with outstretched hand of welcome.  The tint of the smooth skin was that of a dark woman, yet she had eyes of a rich violet blue--large, deep, thoughtful--and her abundant brown hair was drawn back in a wavy ripple from the temples.

But that her glance, so straight and scrutinising as it met mine, became melting and tender as it rested upon her brother, I should have set her down as of a cold disposition, and withal a trifle too resolute for a woman, especially for one of her age.  As it was, I hardly knew what to think.  She did not greatly resemble Brian, who though also tall and handsome was very dark; yet I suspected his to be the gentler disposition of the two.

"You are very welcome, Mr Holt," she said.  "How strange that Brian should have met you down there."

"It was not only strange but providential, for I was literally a shipwrecked mariner thrown up on your shore without a dry stitch on me."

And I told her briefly the plight I had found myself in, when Brian had come to the rescue.  She listened with great interest.

"Well, I am more than ever glad he did.  But what an experience!  The landing one, though, I have been through myself; the bar at East London can be too terrific for words.  By the way, we have a little sister staying down there now with some friends.  We thought the sea-bathing would do her good, and she's so fond of it.  Did you see her, perhaps?"

"Yes.  She met us outside the town to say good-bye.  What a pretty child she is."

"She is, and nicely she gets spoiled on the strength of it," laughed Beryl, but the laugh was wholly a pleasant one, without a tinge of envy or resentment in it.

We chatted a little, and then she proposed we should stroll out and look at the garden and some tiny ostrich chicks she was trying to rear, and flinging on a large rough straw hat which was infinitely becoming, she led the way, down through an avenue of fig trees, and opened a light gate in the high quince hedge.

Then as I stood within the coolness of the garden, which covered some acreage of the side of the slope, I gained a most wonderful impression of the place that was destined to prove my home for a long time to come, and in whose joys and sorrows--yes, and impending tragedies of dark vendetta and bloodshed--I was fated to be associated.  Below the house lay the sheep kraals, and already a woolly cataract was streaming into one of the thorn-protected enclosures, while another awaited its turn at a little distance off.  The cattle kraal, too, was alive with dappled hides, and one unintermittent "moo" of restless and hungry calves, while a blue curling smoke reek from the huts of the Kafir farm servants rose upon the still evening atmosphere.  What is there about that marvellous African sunset glow?  I have seen it many a time since, under far different conditions--under the steamy heat of the lower Zambesi region, and amid piercing cold with many degrees of frost on the high Karoo; in the light dry air of the Kalahari, and in the languorous, semi-tropical richness of beautiful Natal; but never quite as I saw it that evening, standing beside Beryl Matterson.  It was as a scene cut out of Eden, that wondrous changing glow which rested upon the whole valley, playing upon the rolling sea of foliage like the sweep of golden waves, striking the iron face of a noble cliff with a glint of bronze, then dying, to leave a pearly atmosphere redolent of distilling aromatic herbs, tuneful with the cooing of myriad doves and the whistle of plover and the hum of strange winged insects coming forth on their nightly quests.

"Let's see.  How long is it since you and Brian saw each other last, Mr Holt?" said my companion as we strolled between high quince hedges.

"Why, it must have been quite twelve years, rather over than under.  And most of the time has not been good, as far as I was concerned.  The financial crash that forced me to leave school when I did, kept me for years in a state of sedentary drudgery for a pittance.  Something was saved out of the wreck at last, but by that time I had grown `groovy' and fought shy of launching out into anything that involved risk.  I preferred to keep my poor little one talent in a napkin, to the possibility of losing it in the process of turning it into two."

She looked interested as she listened.  The face which I had thought hard grew soft, sympathetic, and wholly alluring.

"There's a good deal in that," she laughed.  "I must say I have often thought the poor one-talent man was rather hardly used.  By the way, when Brian was sent to England to school it was with the idea of making a lawyer or a doctor of him, but he would come back to the farm.  It was rather a sore point with our father for quite a long time after, but now he recognises that it is all for the best.  My father is not what the insurance people call a `good' life, Mr Holt."

"I'm very sorry to hear that.  What is wrong?  Heart?"

"Yes.  But I am boring you with all these family details, but having been Brian's school chum seems to make you almost as one of ourselves."

"Pray rid yourself of the impression that you are boring me, Miss Matterson--on the contrary, I am flattered.  But I must not obtain your good opinion under false pretences.  The fact is, Brian and I were not exactly school chums.  There was too much difference between our ages-- at that time, of course; which makes it all the more friendly and kind of him to have brought me here now."

"Oh, that doesn't make any difference.  If you weren't chums then you will be now, so it's all the same."

Then we talked about other things, and to my inquiries relating to this new land--new to me, that is--Beryl gave ready reply.

"You will have to return the favour, Mr Holt," she said with a smile. "There are many things I shall ask you about by-and-by.  After all, this sort of life is a good deal outside the world, and I have never been to England, you know.  I am only a raw Colonial."

I forget what answer I made; probably it was an idiotic one.  But the idea of associating "rawness" with this well-bred, self-possessed, attractive girl at my side, seemed so outrageous that in all probability I overdid the thing in striving to demonstrate its absurdity.

On regaining the house we found Brian, who had just returned from counting in the flocks.  He was not alone.  Two Kafirs--tall, finely-built savages, their blankets and persons coloured terra-cotta red with ochre--stood at the steps of the stoep conversing with him, the mellow bass of their sonorous language and their far from ungraceful appearance and attitude lending another picturesque element to the rich unfamiliarity of the surroundings.  They, however, were just taking their leave, bestowing upon us a quick, inquisitive glance, and a farewell salutation as they turned away.

"Two more of Kuliso's wandering lambs, Beryl," said Brian, with a significant laugh, as we joined him.  "Yet none of ours, or sheep either, have vanished this time, so I suppose we ought to consider ourselves fortunate.  The count is correct.  By the way, Holt, I'm afraid one of the vicissitudes common to this country has deferred supper for a little.  We can't do better than sit out here, so long."

There were cosy cane chairs upon the stoep, and as we sat chatting I said--

"Who is Kuliso?"

Brian laughed.

"One of the chiefs of the Ndhlambe location just east of us.  A bad egg personally, and his clan is made up of `prize' thieves and stock-lifters."

"But you, Miss Matterson," I went on.  "Is it safe for you to go about alone among such neighbours?"

A glance of understanding, humorous withal, passed between brother and sister.

"Beryl is just about a dead shot, Holt," said the former quietly.

"But even then, what can one do against a number, and that one a--"

"A woman, you were going to say, Mr Holt," supplied that equable, resolute voice, that had already begun to charm me.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Brian.  "Are you afraid to throw up your hat in the air, Holt, now, just as we sit?  But never mind.  It wouldn't be fair to spoil that new `smasher' of yours.  Mine's a very old one.  Look now."

While he had spoken Beryl had disappeared within the house for a moment. Now she stood there holding a revolver--no toy, mind, but a real effective and business-like six-shooter.  Up went Brian's hat, whirling in mid-air.  Just as it rested stationary for a fraction of a second at its highest flight, there was a sharp report; the hat gave a spasmodic jerk, like a live thing, and began to fall.  But before it touched ground there was another report.  Struck again, it gave a leap, and went skimming away to the ground in sidelong flight.

"Magnificent, by Jove!" broke from me.  But that she had lowered the still smoking weapon, Beryl had not moved.  Brian, however, had sprung from his seat to retrieve his hat.

"Call that nothing, Holt?" he cried, pointing out two clean bullet holes--one through the brim, the other through the crown.  "Good thing it wasn't yours, eh?"

"Yes, indeed."

"Brian, it's too bad of you, to make me show off in that way," said Beryl.  "I can't think why I did it.  Now I must go and see to things inside, or you two poor hungry creatures will get nothing to eat to-night."

She disappeared, and as the playful, chiding tone, the merrily deprecatory glance remained in my mind, I realised a strange impression. It seemed that all in a moment she had thrown aside that outer crust of reserve which she had worn for my benefit, and underneath I descried the real Beryl Matterson.  And into a very sweet and alluring personality did my mental gaze seem to penetrate.

"Bushbuck chops, Holt," said Brian, as we sat down to supper, in the snug, well-lighted dining-room, which in the comfort and refinement of its appointments bore token of the hand of a presiding genius--to wit, Beryl.  "Rather out of season, buck, just now; still, we shoot one now and then, if only as a change from the eternal sheep.  Try them.  New kind of grub for you, eh?"

I did try them, and found them perfect, as indeed everything on the table was, and this was a farm on the average scale.  I have since been at many a similar place run on a large scale where the appointments were slovenly in comparison.  But then such did not own Beryl Matterson as a presiding goddess.  Afterwards we adjourned to the stoep.

"Beryl will join us directly, Holt," said Brian, as we lit our pipes. "She has to see to things a bit first.  Girls over here have to do that, you know.  I can tell you we should come off badly if they didn't."

Later on, when I got to my room at the end of the stoep, and turned in between snowy sheets, I appreciated what some of the aforesaid "seeing to things" on Beryl's part involved.

"I expect the governor and George'll sleep at Trask's to-night, and turn up first thing in the morning," declared Brian as it waxed late.  And Beryl, who had long since joined us, concurred.

It was wholly delightful as we sat there chatting, in the soft night air--the range of hills opposite silvered and beautiful in the moonlight, and ever and anon the strange cry of bird or beast floating through the stillness, or the wailing whistle of plover circling above-- and to me the experience was as strange as it was delightful.  A day or two ago, I had felt lonely and forlorn indeed--a stranger in a strange land.  Yet now here I was, in the most congenial surroundings beneath a hospitable roof whose inmates looked upon me as one of themselves and had made me thoroughly at home accordingly.  And the fact that one of the said inmates was an unusually attractive girl did not, you may be sure, under the circumstances tend to lessen the feeling of thorough and comfortable enjoyment to which the situation caused me to give myself up.  At last Brian began to yawn.

"Holt, old chap, you must excuse me," he said.  "We turn out early here and have to turn in tolerably ditto."

I professed myself quite in accord with the idea.  The fact was I felt just a little tired myself.

"So?  Well, then, we'll have a glass of grog and turn in."

If I have dwelt upon the incidents of that first evening, I suppose it is because upon such one's first and most vivid impressions are invariably based.