CHAPTER NINE.

MAINLY VENATORIAL.

Beryl looked wholly fresh and delightful as she welcomed us, and it was hard to believe she had been up nearly three hours "seeing to things," as Brian put it.  There was a good deal of talk, of wholly local interest, with regard to the expeditions of both father and son, and the results thereof, but even it was by no means without interest to me, for, after all, it let me into so much of the inner life of these strange new surroundings.  Presently the young hopeful, looking up from a large plateful of oatmeal porridge and milk, observed--

"I say, Brian, let's go down to Zwaart Kloof this morning and try for a bushbuck ram."

"Well, I don't know.  Yes.  Perhaps Mr Holt would like to try his luck. What do you say, Holt?"

I said I'd like nothing better, but for the trifling drawback that I had no gun--being only a shipwrecked mariner who had come away with nothing but the clothes he stood up in.  But this was speedily over-ruled. There were plenty of guns in the house.  No difficulty about that.

"Can you shoot, Mr Holt?" said the youngster, planting both elbows on the table, and eyeing me with rather disdainful incredulity.

"Well, yes, I can shoot," I said.  "Moderately, that is."

"But you're out from England," went on the cub, as though that settled the matter.

"George, you little ass, shut up, and go and tell them to saddle up Bles and Punch for us," said Brian.  "You can ride Jack."

A volume of expostulation in favour of some other steed having been silenced by Brian in quiet and peremptory fashion, the hopeful went out.

"I'm afraid you'll find George rather a spoilt boy, Mr Holt," said Beryl.  "He and Iris seem to get their own way more than they ought. They are the little ones, you see."

Of course I rejoined that it was quite natural--reserving my own opinion.  In the case of the little girl it was candid: in the other-- well "boy" to me is apt to spell horror; but a spoilt boy, and just a boy of George Matterson's age, well--to fit him, my vocabulary has never yet been able to invent an adequate superlative.

"You'd better have a shot gun, Holt," said Brian, as we started.  "I always use one in thick bush; it's all close shooting."

He handed me a double Number Twelve bore, of first-rate make and poise, and kept in first-rate order too, and some treble A cartridges.

"You won't use all those.  You'll be lucky if you get two fair and square shots," he remarked.

"Good luck, Mr Holt," called out Beryl after us.

I began to feel nervous.  I was only an ordinary shot, and of this form of sport was, of course, utterly without experience--and said as much.

"You only shoot tame pheasants in England, don't you, Mr Holt?" said George, in a tone that made me wish I could turn him into one of the fowl aforesaid.  Could it really be that this impudent young pup was Beryl's brother--or Brian's too, for the matter of that?

We cantered down the valley, then struck up a lateral spur, and rounding it came upon a deep kloof running far up into the hillside--its side black with dense bush, the _boerboen_ and plumed euphorbia, and half a dozen other varieties whose names I didn't know then.

"Here, Tiger, Ratels, get to heel!" cried Brian, apostrophising the rough-haired dogs which had followed, all excited, at our horses' heels. "George, take Mr Holt on to the opening above the little krantz.  You know where to post him.  If he doesn't get a shot there he won't get one anywhere.  Then come back to me."

We made a bit of a circuit, and some twenty minutes later found ourselves in a little open space, surrounded on three sides by dense bush, while the fourth seemed to be the brink of a precipitous fall in the ground.  Here I was carefully posted in the combined cover of an ant-heap and a small mimosa.

"That's where they always break cover," whispered George.  "Man, but you mustn't make a sound.  Don't move--don't cough, even.  So long."

Left alone, my nerves were all athrill with excitement, and I believe my hand shook.  A couple of spreuws perched upon an adjoining bush, melodiously whistling, then, become mysteriously aware of my presence, flashed off--a pair of green-blue streaks, their note changed to one of alarm.  Would they scare the game and turn it back?  I thought agonisingly.  Heavens! what if I should shoot badly, and miss?  What a fool I should look--and this was, in a way, my _debut_!

The space the quarry would have to cross was about twenty yards.  Could I stop it in that distance?  No, I was sure I could not.  I was feeling far too shaky, far too eager--a nervous condition invariably fatal, at any rate in my own case, to effective execution.

The silence settled down around me, broken only by the occasional note of a bird.  Then I started.  What was that?  The yapping of a dog, then another, then a chorus of excited yelps; and as it drew rapidly nearer I realised that they were on the track of something.

Exactly from the direction George had indicated, it came--a quick bounding rush.  A noble antelope leapt out into the open.  Its pointed, slightly spiral horns and dilated eye, the almost black hide with the white belly stripe, seemed photographed in my brain as I pressed the trigger, and--missed.  Like a streak of dark lightning it shot across the open, and my left barrel spoke, a fraction of a second before it disappeared over the declivity.  But in that fraction of a second I had seen the convulsive start, the unmistakable squirm, and could have hurrahed aloud.

I remained still, however, slipping in a couple of fresh cartridges. Another might come out.  But it did not; instead, the dogs appeared hot foot on the scent, and close behind them George.

"Hallo, Mr Holt.  Where's the buck?" cried that youth, with a derisive grin.  "Man, but we drove him right over you."

"And I've driven him right over there," pointing to the brow of the declivity.

"So it seems.  Man! but you won't get such a chance again in a hurry."

"Well, Holt?  No luck, eh?" said Brian, appearing on the scene.

"Well, it depends on whether you look at it from my point of view or the buck's," I said with designed coolness.  "If the latter, you're right."

"Eh?  Why--"

Something of a clamour beneath interrupted him: the fierce worrying of dogs, and the half bellow, half scream, of a bush-buck ram in the last fight for his life.  We did not pause a moment then.  Flinging themselves from their horses--mine had been left much higher up--they plunged down, I following, leaping from rock to rock.  There lay my quarry, unable to rise save on his forelegs, yet savagely menacing with his pointed horns the three dogs which were leaping and snarling frantically around him.

"He's done for--hit rather far back, though," said Brian, calling off the dogs.  "Put another shot into him, Holt--forward this time."

I did, and the animal at once stiffened out, lifeless.

"_Maagtig_! but he's a fine ram," cried George, while congenially amusing himself by cutting the beast's throat.  "You didn't hit him by accident, Mr Holt, hey?"

"Bad accident for the buck, anyway," said Brian with a dry laugh.  "Well done, Holt.  I congratulate you.  Thirteen-inch horns!  We'll have them done up for you as a trophy of your first bushbuck."

I was secretly not a little pleased with myself, as the buck, having been cleaned, was loaded up behind my saddle, and we took our way homewards, for Brian declared that we might be all day and not get anything like so good a chance again, without beaters and with only three dogs.  Moreover, it was rather out of season, and they had come out solely on my account.  I, however, was amply content; indeed, I sneakingly thought it just as well not to spoil the effect of my first prowess by potential and subsequent misses.

Yes, I felt decidedly satisfied with myself and at peace with all the world, as we drew near the homestead an hour or so later, with my quarry strapped behind my saddle.  I heeded not--was rather proud, in fact--of the widening patch of gore which the movement of the horse caused to gather upon my trouser leg during our progress.  The "fellow just out from home," the "raw Britisher," had vindicated himself.  Even that young rascal George seemed to treat me with a shade of newly-fledged respect, and the very intonations in the voices of a couple of Kaffirs hanging around, as we rode up, were intelligible to me as witnessing to my prowess.  Beryl and her father, who were sitting on the stoep when we arrived, came out to meet us.

"Well done, Mr Holt!" said the former.  "I'm so glad you've had some luck."

"I think it was due to your last aspiration, Miss Matterson," I answered, feeling with a satisfaction wholly uncalled for by the occasion that somehow or other I had gone up in her estimation.

"Got him just above the krantz in the Zwaart Kloof, did you?" commented her father.  "That's the place where you'll nearly always get a chance. I suppose this is your first experience of this kind of sport; but I can tell you there's many a man, not a bad shot either, who doesn't fall into it just so soon.  George, take the horses round--let's see, keep Bles up though, I may want him later.  And now we'll go in to dinner."

Throughout that welcome repast I was plying my host eagerly with questions as to the conditions of colonial life, and the vagaries of stock-farming in general; and wondering what a long while ago it seemed since I started for that fateful row at Whiddlecombe Regis, an unconscious voyage of discovery which should terminate in this.

"There are a sight too many Kafirs near us," he said, in answer to one of my questions.  "That's the great drawback.  They take too much toll of our stock, and besides, they have been getting restless lately.  Some people set up a periodical scare, but I don't believe in that sort of thing.  As they are here we must rub along with them as best we can, and I must say they bother me less than they do--or seem to do--some others. But you never know what to expect with savages."

"I suppose not," I answered, thinking of the tussle I had witnessed that morning, and remembering the malignant and vengeful looks of the defeated barbarian as he slunk out by the cattle kraal.  "But couldn't they render the position--well, rather impossible for you, here, for instance, if they were to combine."

"That's just it--they can't combine.  But if you know how to take them, and not expect to find angels under a red blanket and a daub of _root klip_, you can pull with them as well as with anybody else.  Only you must never for a moment let them imagine you're afraid of them."

I little thought then how near was the time when I should witness Septimus Matterson's theory tested--and that severely.  Yet that was to come, and it was only the beginning of a series of stirring events calling for readiness of resource and cool judgment and iron courage. The sun was shining now, the sky unclouded.  Yet was the storm behind, gathering afar.