M. RADISSON BEGINS THE GAME

M. Radisson had reckoned well.  His warning to prepare for instant siege set all the young fire-eaters of our Habitation working like beavers to complete the French fort.  The marquis took a hand at squaring timbers shoulder to shoulder with Allemand, the pilot; and La Chesnaye, the merchant prince, forgot to strut while digging up earthworks for a parapet.  The leaven of the New World was working. Honour was for him only whose brawn won the place; and our young fellows of the birth and the pride were keenest to gird for the task. On our return from the upper river to the fort, the palisaded walls were finished, guns were mounted on all bastions, the two ships beached under shelter of cannon, sentinels on parade at the main gate, and a long barracks built mid-way across the courtyard.

Here we passed many a merry hour of a long winter night, the green timbers cracking like pistol-shots to the tightening frost-grip, and the hearth logs at each end of the long, low-raftered hall sending up a roar that set the red shadows dancing among ceiling joists.  After ward-room mess, with fare that kings might have envied--teal and partridge and venison and a steak of beaver's tail, and moose nose as an _entrée_, with a tidbit of buffalo hump that melted in your mouth like flakes--the commonalty, as La Chesnaye designated those who sat below the salt, would draw off to the far hearth.  Here the sailors gathered close, spinning yarns, cracking jokes, popping corn, and toasting wits, a-merrier far that your kitchen cuddies of older lands. At the other hearth sat M. de Radisson, feet spread to the fire, a long pipe between his lips, and an audience of young blades eager for his tales.

"D'ye mind how we got away from the Iroquois, Chouart?" Radisson asks Groseillers, who sits in a chair rough-hewn from a stump on the other side of the fire.

Chouart Groseillers smiles quietly and strokes his black beard.  Jean stretches across a bear-skin on the floor and shouts out, "Tell us! Tell us!"

"We had been captives six months.  The Iroquois were beginning to let us wander about alone.  Chouart there had sewed his thumb up, where an old squaw had hacked at it with a dull shell.  The padre's nails, which the Indians tore off in torture, had grown well enough for him to handle a gun.  One day we were allowed out to hunt.  Chouart brought down three deer, the padre two moose, and I a couple of bear.  That night the warriors came back from a raid on Orange with not a thing to eat but one miserable, little, thin, squealing pig.  Pardieu! men, 'twas our chance; and the chance is always hiding round a corner for the man who goes ahead."

Radisson paused to whiff his pipe, all the lights in his eyes laughing and his mouth expressionless as steel.

"'Tis an insult among Iroquois to leave food at a feast.  There were we with food enough to stuff the tribe torpid as winter toads.  The padre was sent round to the lodges with a tom-tom to beat every soul to the feast.  Chouart and a Dutch prisoner and I cooked like kings' scullions for four mortal hours!--"

"We wanted to delay the feast till midnight," explains Groseillers.

"And at midnight in trooped every man, woman, and brat of the encampment.  The padre takes a tom-tom and stands at one end of the lodge beating a very knave of a rub-a-dub and shouting at the top of his voice: 'Eat, brothers, eat!  Bulge the eye, swell the coat, loose the belt!  Eat, brothers, eat!'  Chouart stands at the boiler ladling out joints faster than an army could gobble.  Within an hour every brat lay stretched and the women were snoring asleep where they crouched. From the warriors, here a grunt, there a groan!  But Chouart keeps ladling out the meat.  Then the Dutchman grabs up a drum at the other end of the lodge, and begins to beat and yell: 'Stuff, brudders, stuff! Vat de gut zperets zend, gast not out!  Eat, braves, eat!'  And the padre cuts the capers of a fiend on coals.  Still the warriors eat! Still the drums beat!  Still the meat is heaped!  Then, one brave bowls over asleep with his head on his knees!  Another warrior tumbles back! Guards sit bolt upright sound asleep as a stone!"

"What did you put in the meat, Pierre?" asked Groseillers absently.

Radisson laughed.

"Do you mind, Chouart," he asked, "how the padre wanted to put poison in the meat, and the Dutchman wouldn't let him?  Then the Dutchman wanted to murder them all in their sleep, and the padre wouldn't let him?"

Both men laughed.

"And the end?" asked Jean.

"We tied the squealing pig at the door for sentinel, broke ice with our muskets, launched the canoe, and never stopped paddling till we reached Three Rivers." 

At that comes a loud sally of laughter from the sailors at the far end of the hall.  Godefroy, the English trader, is singing a rhyme of All Souls' Day, and Allemand, the French pilot, protests.

  "Soul!  Soul!  For a soul-cake!   One for Peter, two for Paul,   Three for----."

But La Chesnaye shouts out for the knaves to hold quiet.  Godefroy bobs his tipstaff, and bawls on:

  "Soul!  Soul!  For an apple or two!   If you've got no apples, nuts will do!   Out with your raisins, down with your gin!   Give me plenty and I'll begin."

M. Radisson looks down the hall and laughs.  "By the saints," says he softly, "a man loses the Christian calendar in this land!  'Tis All Souls' Night!  Give the men a treat, La Chesnaye."

But La Chesnaye, being governor, must needs show his authority, and vows to flog the knave for impudence.  Turning over benches in his haste, the merchant falls on Godefroy with such largesse of cuffs that the fellow is glad to keep peace.

The door blows open, and with a gust of wind a silent figure blows in. 'Tis Le Borgne, the one-eyed, who has taken to joining our men of a merry night, which M. de Radisson encourages; for he would have all the Indians come freely.

"Ha!" says Radisson, "I thought 'twas the men I sent to spy if the marsh were safe crossing.  Give Le Borgne tobacco, La Chesnaye.  If once the fellow gets drunk," he adds to me in an undertone, "that silent tongue of his may wag on the interlopers.  We must be stirring, stirring, Ramsay!  Ten days past!  Egad, a man might as well be a fish-worm burrowing underground as such a snail!  We must stir--stir! See here"--drawing me to the table apart from the others--"here we are on the lower river," and he marked the letter X on a line indicating the flow of our river to the bay.  "Here is the upper river," and he drew another river meeting ours at a sharp angle.  "Here is Governor Brigdar of the Hudson's Bay Company," marking another X on the upper river.  "Here is Ben Gillam!  We are half-way between them on the south.  I sent two men to see if the marsh between the rivers is fit crossing."



"Fit crossing?"

"When 'tis safe, we might plan a surprise.  The only doubt is how many of those pirates are there who attacked you in the woods?"

And he sat back whiffing his pipe and gazing in space.  By this, La Chesnaye had distributed so generous a treat that half the sailors were roaring out hilarious mirth.  Godefroy astride a bench played big drum on the wrong-end-up of the cook's dish-pan.  Allemand attempted to fiddle a poker across the tongs.  Voyageurs tried to shoot the big canoe over a waterfall; for when Jean tilted one end of the long bench, they landed as cleanly on the floor as if their craft had plunged.  But the copper-faced Le Borgne remained taciturn and tongue-tied.

"Be curse to that wall-eyed knave," muttered Radisson.  "He's too deep a man to let go!  We must capture him or win him!"

"Perhaps when he becomes more friendly we may track him back to the inlanders," I suggested.

M. de Radisson closed one eye and looked at me attentively.

"La Chesnaye," he called, "treat that fellow like a king!"

And the rafters rang so loud with the merriment that we none of us noticed the door flung open, nor saw two figures stamping off the snow till they had thrown a third man bound at M. de Radisson's feet.  The messengers sent to spy out the marsh had returned with a half-frozen prisoner.

"We found him where the ice is soft.  He was half dead," explained one scout.

Silence fell.  Through the half-dark the Indian glided towards the door.  The unconscious prisoner lay face down.

"Turn him over," ordered Radisson.

As our men rolled him roughly over, the captive uttered a heavy groan. His arms fell away from his face revealing little Jack Battle, the castaway, in a haven as strange as of old.

"Search him before he wakes," commanded Radisson roughly.

"Let me," I asked.

In the pouches of the caribou coat was only pemmican; but my hand crushed against a softness in the inner waistcoat.  I pulled it out--a little, old glove, the colour Hortense had dangled the day that Ben Gillam fell into the sea.

"Pish!" says Radisson.  "Anything else?"

There crumpled out a yellow paper.  M. Radisson snatched it up.

"Pish!" says he, "nothing--put it back!"

It was a page of my copy-book, when I used to take lessons with Rebecca.  Replacing paper and glove, I closed up the sailor lad's coat.

"Search his cap and moccasins!"

I was mighty thankful, as you may guess, that other hands than mine found the tell-tale missive--a badly writ letter addressed to "Captain Zechariah Gillium."

Tearing it open, M. Radisson read with stormy lights agleam in his eyes.

"Sir, this sailor lad is an old comrade," I pleaded.

"Then'a God's name take care of him," he flashed out.

But long before I had Jack Battle thawed back to consciousness in my own quarters, Jean came running with orders for me to report to M. Radisson.

"I'll take care of the sailor for you," proffered Jean.

And I hastened to the main hall.

"Get ready," ordered Radisson.  "We must stir!  That young hop-o'-my-thumb suspects his father has arrived.  He has sent this fellow with word of me.  Things will be doing.  We must stir--we must stir.  Read those for news," and he handed me the letter.

The letter was addressed to Ben's father, of the Hudson's Bay ship, Prince Rupert.  In writing which was scarcely legible, it ran:


  I take Up my Pen to lett You knowe that cutt-throte   french viper Who deserted You at ye fort of ye bay 10 Years   ago hath come here for France Threatening us.

  he Must Be Stopped.  Will i Do It?

  have Bin Here Come Six weekes All Souls' day and Not   Heard a Word of Him that went inland to Catch ye Furs   from ye Savages before they Mett Governor B----.  If He   Proves False----


There the crushed missive was torn, but the purport was plain.  Ben Gillam and his father were in collusion with the inland pirates to get peltries from the Indians before Governor Brigdar came; and the inlanders, whoever they were, had concealed both themselves and the furs.  I handed the paper back to M. Radisson.

"We must stir, lad--we must stir," he repeated.

"But the marsh is soft yet.  It is unsafe to cross."

"The river is not frozen in mid-current," retorted M. Radisson impatiently.  "Get ready!  I am taking different men to impress the young spark with our numbers--you and La Chesnaye and the marquis and Allemand.  But where a' devil is that Indian?"

Le Borgne had slipped away.

"Is he a spy?" I asked.

"Get ready!  Why do you ask questions?  The thing is--to do!--do!!--do--!!!"

But Allemand, who had been hauling out the big canoe, came up sullenly.

"Sir," he complained, "the river's running ice the size of a raft, and the wind's a-blowing a gale."

"Man," retorted M. de Radisson with the quiet precision of steel, "if the river were running live fire and the gale blew from the inferno, I--would--go!  Stay home and go to bed, Allemand."  And he chose one of the common sailors instead.

And when we walked out to the thick edge of the shore-ice and launched the canoe among a whirling drift of ice-pans, we had small hope of ever seeing Fort Bourbon again.  The ice had not the thickness of the spring jam, but it was sharp enough to cut our canoe, and we poled our way far oftener than we paddled.  Where the currents of the two rivers joined, the wind had whipped the waters to a maelstrom.  The night was moonless.  It was well we did not see the white turmoil, else M. Radisson had had a mutiny on his hands.  When the canoe leaped to the throb of the sucking currents like a cataract to the plunge, La Chesnaye clapped his pole athwart and called out a curse on such rashness.  M. Radisson did not hear or did not heed.  An ice-pan pitched against La Chesnaye's place, and the merchant must needs thrust out to save himself.

The only light was the white glare of ice.  The only guide across that heaving traverse, the unerring instinct of that tall figure at the bow, now plunging forward, now bracing back, now shouting out a "Steady!" that the wind carried to our ears, thrusting his pole to right, to left in lightning strokes, till the canoe suddenly darted up the roaring current of the north river.

Here we could no longer stem both wind and tide.  M. Radisson ordered us ashore for rest.  Fourteen days were we paddling, portaging, struggling up the north river before we came in range of the Hudson's Bay fort built by Governor Brigdar.

Our proximity was heralded by a low laugh from M. de Radisson.  "Look," said he, "their ship aground in mud a mile from the fort.  In case of attack, their forces will be divided.  It is well," said M. Radisson.

The Prince Rupert lay high on the shallows, fast bound in the freezing sands.  Hiding our canoe in the woods, we came within hail and called. There was no answer.

"Drunk or scurvy," commented M. Radisson.  "An faith, Ramsay, 'twould be an easy capture if we had big enough fort to hold them all!"

Shaping his hands to a trumpet, he shouted, "How are you, there?"

As we were turning away a fellow came scrambling up the fo'castle and called back: "A little better, but all asleep."

"A good time for us to examine the fort," said M. de Radisson.

Aloud, he answered that he would not disturb the crew, and he wheeled us off through the woods.

"See!" he observed, as we emerged in full view of the stockaded fur post, "palisades nailed on from the inside--easily pushed loose from the outside.  Pish!--low enough for a dog to jump."

Posting us in ambush, he advanced to the main edifice behind the wide-open gate.  I saw him shaking hands with the Governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, who seemed on the point of sallying out to hunt.

Then he signalled for us to come.  I had almost concluded he meant to capture Governor Brigdar on the spot; but Pierre Radisson ever took friends and foes unawares.

"Your Excellency," says he, with the bow of a courtier, "this is Captain Gingras of our new ship."

Before I had gathered my wits, Governor Brigdar was shaking hands.

"And this," continued Radisson, motioning forward the common sailor too quick for surprise to betray us, "this, Your Excellency, is Colonel Bienville of our marines."

Colonel Bienville, being but a lubberly fellow, nigh choked with amazement at the English governor's warmth; but before we knew our leader's drift, the marquis and La Chesnaye were each in turn presented as commanders of our different land forces.

"'Tis the misfortune of my staff not to speak English," explains Pierre Radisson suavely with another bow, which effectually shut any of our mouths that might have betrayed him.

"Doubtless your officers know Canary better than English," returns Governor Brigdar; and he would have us all in to drink healths.

"Keep your foot in the open door," Pierre Radisson whispered as we passed into the house.

Then we drank the health of the King of England, firing our muskets into the roof; and drank to His Most Christian Majesty of France with another volley; and drank to the confusion of our common enemies, with a clanking of gun-butts that might have alarmed the dead.  Upon which Pierre Radisson protested that he would not keep Governor Brigdar from the hunt; and we took our departure.

"And now," said he, hastening through the bush, "as no one took fright at all that firing, what's to hinder examining the ship?"

"Pardieu, Ramsay," he remarked, placing us in ambush again, "an we had a big enough fort, with food to keep them alive, we might have bagged them all."

From which I hold that M. Radisson was not so black a man as he has been painted; for he could have captured the English as they lay weak of the scurvy and done to them, for the saving of fort rations, what rivals did to all foes--shot them in a land which tells no secrets.

From our place on the shore we saw him scramble to the deck.  A man in red nightcap rushed forward with an oath.

"And what might you want, stealing up like a thief in the night?" roared the man.

"To offer my services, Captain Gillam," retorted Radisson with a hand to his sword-hilt and both feet planted firm on the deck.

"Services?" bawled Gillam.

"Services for your crew, captain," interrupted Radisson softly.

"Hm!" retorted Captain Gillam, pulling fiercely at his grizzled beard. "Then you might send a dozen brace o' partridges, some oil, and candles."

With that they fell to talking in lower tones; and M. Radisson came away with quiet, unspoken mirth in his eyes, leaving Captain Gillam in better mood.

"Curse me if he doesn't make those partridges an excuse to go back soon," exclaimed La Chesnaye.  "The ship would be of some value; but why take the men prisoners?  Much better shoot them down as they would us, an they had the chance!"

"La Chesnaye!" uttered a sharp voice.  Radisson had heard.  "There are two things I don't excuse a fool for--not minding his own business and not holding his tongue."

And though La Chesnaye's money paid for the enterprise, he held his tongue mighty still.  Indeed, I think if any tongue had wagged twice in Radisson's hearing he would have torn the offending member out.  Doing as we were bid without question, we all filed down to the canoe.  Less ice cumbered the upper current, and by the next day we were opposite Ben Gillam's New England fort.

"La Chesnaye and Forêt will shoot partridges," commanded M. de Radisson.  Leaving them on the far side of the river, he bade the sailor and me paddle him across to young Gillam's island.

What was our surprise to see every bastion mounted with heavy guns and the walls full manned.  We took the precaution of landing under shelter of the ship and fired a musket to call out sentinels.  Down ran Ben Gillam and a second officer, armed cap-a-pie, with swaggering insolence that they took no pains to conceal.

"Congratulate you on coming in the nick of time," cried Ben.

"Now what in the Old Nick does he mean by that?" said Radisson.  "Does the cub think to cower me with his threats?"

"I trust your welcome includes my four officers," he responded.  "Two are with me and two have gone for partridges."

Ben bellowed a jeering laugh, and his second man took the cue.

"Your four officers may be forty devils," yelled the lieutenant; "we've finished our fort.  Come in, Monsieur Radisson!  Two can play at the game of big talk!  You're welcome in if you leave your forty officers out!"

For the space of a second M. Radisson's eyes swept the cannon pointing from the bastion embrasures.  We were safe enough.  The full hull of their own ship was between the guns and us.

"Young man," said M. Radisson, addressing Ben, "you may speak less haughtily, as I come in friendship."

"Friendship!" flouted Ben, twirling his mustache and showing both rows of teeth.  "Pooh, pooh, M. Radisson!  You are not talking to a stripling!"

"I had thought I was--and a very fool of a booby, too," answered M. Radisson coolly.

"Sir!" roared young Gillam with a rumbling of oaths, and he fumbled his sword.

But his sword had not left the scabbard before M. de Radisson sent it spinning through mid-air into the sea.

"I must ask your forgiveness for that, boy," said the Frenchman to Ben, "but a gentleman fights only his equals."

Ben Gillam went white and red by turns, his nose flushing and paling like the wattle of an angry turkey; and he stammered out that he hoped M. de Radisson did not take umbrage at the building of a fort.

"We must protect ourselves from the English," pleaded Ben.

"Pardieu, yes," agreed M. de Radisson, proffering his own sword with a gesture in place of the one that had gone into the sea, "and I had come to offer you twenty men _to hold_ the fort!"

Ben glanced questioningly to his second officer.

"Bid that fellow draw off!" ordered M. Radisson.

Dazed like a man struck between the eyes, Ben did as he was commanded.

"I told you that I came in friendship," began Radisson.

Gillam waited.

"Have you lost a man, Ben?"

"No," boldly lied Gillam.

"Has one run away from the island against orders?"

"No, devil take me, if I've lost a hand but the supercargo that I killed."

"I had thought that was yours," said Radisson, with contempt for the ruffian's boast; and he handed out the paper taken from Jack.

Ben staggered back with a great oath, vowing he would have the scalp of the traitor who lost that letter.  Both stood silent, each contemplating the other.  Then M. Radisson spoke.

"Ben," said he, never taking his glance from the young fellow's face, "what will you give me if I guide you to your father this afternoon?  I have just come from Captain Gillam.  He and his crew are ill of the scurvy.  Dress as a coureur and I pass you for a Frenchman."

"My father!" cried Ben with his jaws agape and his wits at sea.

"Pardieu--yes, I said your father!"

"What do you want in return?" stammered Ben.

Radisson uttered a laugh that had the sound of sword-play.

"Egad, 'tis a hot supper I'd like better than anything else just now! If you feed us well and disguise yourself as a coureur, I'll take you at sundown!"

And in spite of his second officer's signals, Ben Gillam hailed us forthwith to the fort, where M. Radisson's keen eyes took in every feature of door and gate and sally-port and gun.  While the cook was preparing our supper and Ben disguising as a French wood-runner, we wandered at will, M. Radisson all the while uttering low laughs and words as of thoughts.

It was--"Caught--neat as a mouse in a trap!  Don't let him spill the canoe when we're running the traverse, Ramsay!  May the fiends blast La Chesnaye if he opens his foolish mouth in Gillam's hearing!  Where, think you, may we best secure him?  Are the timbers of your room sound?"

Or else--"Faith, a stout timber would hold those main gates open! Egad, now, an a man were standing in this doorway, he might jam a musket in the hinge so the thing would keep open!  Those guns in the bastions though--think you those cannon are not pushed too far through the windows to be slued round quickly?"

And much more to the same purpose, which told why M. Radisson stooped to beg supper from rivals.

At sundown all was ready for departure.  La Chesnaye and the marquis had come back with the partridges that were to make pretence for our quick return to the Prince Rupert.  Ben Gillam had disguised as a bush-runner, and the canoe lay ready to launch.  Fools and children unconsciously do wise things by mistake, as you know; and 'twas such an unwitting act sprung M. Radisson's plans and let the prize out of the trap.

"Sink me an you didn't promise the loan of twenty men to hold the fort!" exclaimed Ben, stepping down.

"Twenty--and more--and welcome," cried Radisson eagerly.

"Then send Ramsay and Monsieur La Chesnaye back," put in Ben quickly. "I like not the fort without one head while I'm away."

"Willingly," and M. Radisson's eyes glinted triumph.

"Hold a minute!" cried Ben before sitting down.  "The river is rough. Let two of my men take their places in the canoe!"

M. Radisson's breath drew sharp through his teeth.  But the trap was sprung, and he yielded gracefully enough to hide design.

"A curse on the blundering cub!" he muttered, drawing apart to give me instructions.  "Pardieu--you must profit on this, Ramsay!  Keep your eyes open.  Spoil a door-lock or two!  Plug the cannon if you can!  Mix sand with their powder!  Shift the sentinels!  Get the devils insubordinate----"


"M. Radisson!" shouted Gillam.

"Coming!" says Radisson; and he went off with his teeth gritting sand.


 See Radisson's own account.