THE WHITE DARKNESS

How much of those instructions we carried out I leave untold. Certainly we could not have been less grateful as guests than Ben Gillam's men were inhospitable as hosts.  A more sottish crew of rakes you never saw.  'Twas gin in the morning and rum in the afternoon and vile potions of mixed poisons half the night, with a cracking of the cook's head for withholding fresh kegs and a continual scuffle of fighters over cheating at cards.  No marvel the second officer flogged and carved at the knaves like an African slaver.  The first night the whole crew set on us with drawn swords because we refused to gamble the doublets from our backs.  La Chesnaye laid about with his sword and I with my rapier, till the cook rushed to our rescue with a kettle of lye.  After that we escaped to the deck of the ship and locked ourselves inside Ben Gillam's cabin.  Here we heard the weather-vanes of the fort bastions creaking for three days to the shift of fickle winds.  Shore-ice grew thicker and stretched farther to mid-current. Mock suns, or sun-dogs, as we called them, oft hung on each side of the sun.  La Chesnaye said these boded ill weather.

Sea-birds caught the first breath of storm and wheeled landward with shrill calls, and once La Chesnaye and I made out through the ship's glass a vast herd of caribou running to sniff the gale from the crest of an inland hill.

"If Radisson comes not back soon we are storm-bound here for the winter.  As you live, we are," grumbled the merchant.

But prompt as the ring of a bell to the clapper came Pierre Radisson on the third day, well pleased with what he had done and alert to keep two of us outside the fort in spite of Ben's urgings to bring the French in for refreshments.

The wind was shifting in a way that portended a nor'easter, and the weather would presently be too inclement for us to remain outside. That hastened M. Radisson's departure, though sun-dogs and the long, shrill whistling of contrary winds foretold what was brewing.

"Sink me, after such kindness, I'll see you part way home!  By the Lord Harry, I will!" swore Ben.

M. Radisson screwed his eyes nigh shut and protested he could not permit young Captain Gillam to take such trouble.

"The young villain," mutters La Chesnaye, "he wants to spy which way we go."

"Come!  Come!" cries Ben.  "If you say another word I go all the way with you!"

"To spy on our fort," whispers La Chesnaye.

M. Radisson responds that nothing would give greater pleasure.

"I've half a mind to do it," hesitates Ben, looking doubtfully at us.

"To be sure," urges M. Radisson, "come along and have a Christmas with our merry blades!"

"Why, then, by the Lord, I will!" decides Gillam.  "That is," he added, "if you'll send the marquis and his man, there, back to my fort as hostages."

M. Radisson twirled his mustaches thoughtfully, gave the marquis the same instructions in French as he had given us when we were left in the New Englander's fort, and turning with a calm face to Ben, bade him get into our canoe.

But when we launched out M. Radisson headed the craft up-stream in the wrong direction, whither we paddled till nightfall.  It was cold enough in all conscience to afford Ben Gillam excuse for tipping a flask from his jacket-pouch to his teeth every minute or two; but when we were rested and ready to launch again, the young captain's brain was so befuddled that he scarce knew whether he were in Boston or on Hudson Bay.

This time we headed straight down-stream, Ben nodding and dozing from his place in the middle, M. Radisson, La Chesnaye, and I poling hard to keep the drift-ice off.  We avoided the New Englander's fort by going on the other side of the island, and when we shot past Governor Brigdar's stockades with the lights of the Prince Rupert blinking through the dark, Ben was fast asleep.

And all the while the winds were piping overhead with a roar as from the wings of the great storm bird which broods over all that northland. Then the blore of the trumpeting wind was answered by a counter fugue from the sea, with a roll and pound of breakers across the sand of the traverse.  Carried by the swift current, we had shot into the bay.  It was morning, but the black of night had given place to the white darkness of northern storm.  Ben Gillam jerked up sober and grasped an idle pole to lend a hand.  Through the whirl of spray M. Radisson's figure loomed black at the bow, and above the boom of tumbling waves came the grinding as of an earthquake.

"We are lost!  We are lost!" shrieked Gillam in panic, cowering back to the stern.  "The storm's drifted down polar ice from the north and we're caught!  We're caught!" he cried.

He sprang to his feet as if to leap into that white waste of seething ice foam.  'Twas the frenzy of terror, which oft seizes men adrift on ice.  In another moment he would have swamped us under the pitching crest of a mountain sea.  But M. Radisson turned.  One blow of his pole and the foolish youth fell senseless to the bottom of the canoe.

"Look, sir, look!" screamed La Chesnaye, "the canoe's getting ice-logged!  She's sunk to the gun'ales!"

But at the moment when M. Radisson turned to save young Gillam, the unguided canoe had darted between two rolling seas.  Walls of ice rose on either side.  A white whirl--a mighty rush--a tumult of roaring waters--the ice walls pitched down--the canoe was caught--tossed up--nipped--crushed like a card-box--and we four flung on the drenching ice-pans to a roll of the seas like to sweep us under, with a footing slippery as glass.

"Keep hold of Gillam!  Lock hands!" came a clarion voice through the storm.  "Don't fear, men!  There is no danger!  The gale will drive us ashore!  Don't fear!  Hold tight!  Hold tight!  There's no danger if you have no fear!"

The ice heaved and flung to the roll of the drift.

"Hold fast and your wet sleeves will freeze you to the ice!  Steady!" he called, as the thing fell and rose again.

Then, with the hiss of the world serpent that pursues man to his doom, we were scudding before a mountain swell.  There was the splintering report of a cannon-shot.  The ice split.  We clung the closer.  The rush of waves swept under us, around us, above us.  There came a crash. The thing gave from below.  The powers of darkness seemed to close over us, the jaws of the world serpent shut upon their prey, the spirit of evil shrieked its triumph.

Our feet touched bottom.  The waves fell back, and we were ashore on the sand-bar of the traverse.

"Run!  Run for your lives!" shouted Radisson.  Jerking up Gillam, whom the shock had brought to his senses.  "Lock hands and run!"

And run we did, like those spirits in the twilight of the lost, with never a hope of rescue and never a respite from fear, hand gripping hand, the tide and the gale and the driving sleet yelping wolfishly at our heels!  Twas the old, old story of Man leaping undaunted as a warrior to conquer his foes--turned back!--beaten!--pursued by serpent and wolf, spirit of darkness and power of destruction, with the light of life flickering low and the endless frosts creeping close to a heart beating faint!

Oh, those were giants that we set forth to conquer in that harsh northland--the giants of the warring elements!  And giants were needed for the task.

Think you of that when you hear the slighting scorn of the rough pioneer, because he minceth not his speech, nor weareth ruffs at his wrists, nor bendeth so low at the knee as your Old-World hero!

The earth fell away from our feet.  We all four tumbled forward.  The storm whistled past overhead.  And we lay at the bottom of a cliff that seemed to shelter a multitude of shadowy forms.  We had fallen to a ravine where the vast caribou herds had wandered from the storm.

Says M. Radisson, with a depth of reverence which words cannot tell, "Men," says he, "thank God for this deliverance!"

      *      *      *      *      *      *

So unused to man's presence were the caribou, or perhaps so stupefied by the storm, they let us wander to the centre of the herd, round which the great bucks had formed a cordon with their backs to the wind to protect the does and the young.  The heat from the multitude of bodies warmed us back to life, and I make no doubt the finding of that herd was God Almighty's provision for our safety.

For three days we wandered with nothing to eat but wild birds done to death by the gale.   On the third day the storm abated; but it was still snowing too heavily for us to see a man's length away.  Two or three times the caribou tossed up their heads sniffing the air suspiciously, and La Chesnaye fell to cursing lest the wolf-pack should stampede the herd.  At this Gillam, whose hulking body had wasted from lack of bulky rations, began to whimper--

"If the wolf-pack come we are lost!"

"Man," says Radisson sternly, "say thy prayers and thank God we are alive!"

The caribou began to rove aimlessly for a time, then they were off with a rush that bare gave us chance to escape the army of clicking hoofs. We were left unprotected in the falling snow.

The primal instincts come uppermost at such times, and like the wild creatures of the woods facing a foe, instantaneously we wheeled back to back, alert for the enemy that had frightened the caribou.

"Hist!" whispers Radisson.  "Look!"

Ben Gillam leaped into the air as if he had been shot, shrieking out: "It's him!  It's him!  Shoot him!  The thief!  The traitor!  It's him!"

He dashed forward, followed by the rest of us, hardly sure whether Ben were sane.

Three figures loomed through the snowy darkness, white and silent as the snow itself--vague as phantoms in mist--pointing at us like wraiths of death--spirit hunters incarnate of that vast wilderness riding the riotous storm over land and sea.  One swung a weapon aloft.  There was the scream as of a woman's cry--and the shrieking wind had swept the snow-clouds about us in a blind fury that blotted all sight.  And when the combing billows of drift passed, the apparition had faded.  We four stood alone staring in space with strange questionings.

"Egad!" gasped Radisson, "I don't mind when the wind howls like a wolf, but when it takes to the death-scream, with snow like the skirts of a shroud----"

"May the Lord have mercy on us!" muttered La Chesnaye, crossing himself.  "It is sign of death!  That was a woman's figure.  It is sign of death!"

"Sign of death!" raged Ben, stamping his impotent fury, "'tis him--'tis him!  The Judas Iscariot, and he's left us to die so that he may steal the furs!"

"Hold quiet!" ordered M. Radisson.  "Look, you rantipole--who is that?"

'Twas Le Borgne, the one-eyed, emerging from the gloom of the snow like a ghost.  By signs and Indian words the fellow offered to guide us back to our Habitation.

We reached the fort that night, Le Borgne flitting away like a shadow, as he had come.  And the first thing we did was to hold a service of thanks to God Almighty for our deliverance.


 See Radisson's account--Prince Society (1885), Boston--Bodleian Library.--Canadian Archives, 1895-'96.