THE BATTLE NOT TO THE STRONG

M. Radisson turned the sand-glass up to time our preparations.  Before the last grain fell we seven were out, led by M. Radisson, speeding over the snow-drifted marsh through the thick frosty darkness that lies like a blanket over that northland at dawn.  The air hung heavy, gray, gritty to the touch with ice-frost.  The hard-packed drifts crisped to our tread with little noises which I can call by no other name than frost-shots.  Frost pricked the taste to each breath.  Endless reaches of frost were all that met the sight.  Frost-crackling the only sound. Frost in one's throat like a drink of water, and the tingle of the frost in the blood with a leap that was fulness of life.

Up drifts with the help of our muskets!  Down hills with a rush of snow-shoes that set the powdery snow flying!  Skimming the levels with the silent speed of wings!  Past the snow mushrooms topping underbrush and the snow cones of the evergreens and the snow billows of under rocks and the snow-wreathed antlers of the naked forest in a world of snow!

The morning stars paled to steel pin-pricks through a gray sky. Shadows took form in the frost.  The slant rays of a southern sun struck through the frost clouds in spears.  Then the frost smoke rose like mist, and the white glare shone as a sea.  In another hour it would be high noon of the short shadow.  Every coat--beaver and bear and otter and raccoon--hung open, every capote flung back, every runner hot as in midsummer, though frost-rime edged the hair like snow.  When the sun lay like a fiery shield half-way across the southern horizon, M. Radisson called a halt for nooning.

"Now, remember, my brave lads," said he, after he had outlined his plans, drawing figures of fort and ship and army of seven on the snow, "now, remember, if you do what I've told you, not a shot will be fired, not a drop of blood spilled, not a grain of powder used, and to every man free tobacco for the winter--"

"If we succeed," interjects Godefroy sullenly.

"_If_," repeats M. Radisson; "an I hear that word again there will be a carving!"

Long before we came to the north river near the Hudson's Bay Company's fort, the sun had wheeled across the horizon and sunk in a sea of snow, but now that the Prince Rupert had foundered, the capture of these helpless Englishmen was no object to us.  Unless a ship from the south end of the bay came to rescue them they were at our mercy.  Hastening up the river course we met Governor Brigdar sledding the ice with a dog-team of huskies.

"The compliments of the season to Your Excellency!" shouted Radisson across the snow.

"The same to the representative of France," returned Governor Brigdar, trying to get away before questions could be asked.

"I don't see your ship," called Radisson.

"Four leagues down the river," explained the governor.

"_Under_ the river," retorted Radisson, affecting not to hear.

"No--down the river," and the governor whisked round a bluff out of call.

The gray night shadows gathered against the woods.  Stars seeded the sky overhead till the whole heavens were aglow.  And the northern lights shot their arrowy jets of fire above the pole, rippled in billows of flame, scintillated with the faint rustling of a flag in a gale, or swung midway between heaven and earth like censers to the invisible God of that cold, far, northern world.

Then the bastions of Ben Gillam's fort loomed above the wastes like the peak of a ship at sea, and M. Radisson issued his last commands. Godefroy and I were to approach the main gate.  M. Radisson and his five men would make a detour to attack from the rear.

A black flag waved above the ship to signal those inland pirates whom Ben Gillam was ever cursing, and the main gates stood wide ajar.  Half a mile away Godefroy hallooed aloud.  A dozen New Englanders, led by the lieutenant, ran to meet us.

"Where is Master Ben?" demanded the leader.

"Le capitaine," answered Godefroy, affecting broken English, "le capitaine, he is fatigue.  He is back--voilá--how you for speak it?--avec, monsieur!  Le capitaine, he has need, he has want for you to go with food."

At that, with a deal of unguarded gabbling, they must hail us inside for refreshments, while half a dozen men ran in the direction Godefroy pointed with the food for their master.  No sooner were their backs turned than Godefroy whispers instructions to the marquis and his man, who had been left as hostages.  Forêt strolled casually across to the guard-room, where the powder was stored.  Here he posted himself in the doorway with his sword jammed above the hinge.  His man made a precipitate rush to heap fires for our refreshment, dropping three logs across the fort gates and two more athwart the door of the house. Godefroy and I, on pretext of scanning out the returning travellers, ran one to the nigh bastion, the other to the fore-deck of the ship, where was a swivel cannon that might have done damage.

Then Godefroy whistled.

Like wolves out of the earth rose M. Radisson and his five men from the shore near the gates.  They were in possession before the lieutenant and his men had returned.  On the instant when the surprised New Englanders ran up, Radisson bolted the gates.

"Where is my master?" thundered the lieutenant, beating for admission.

"Come in."  M. Radisson cautiously opened the gate, admitting the lieutenant alone.  "It is not a question of where your master is, but of mustering your men and calling the roll," said the Frenchman to the astounded lieutenant.  "You see that my people are in control of your powder-house, your cannon, and your ship.  Your master is a prisoner in my fort.  Now summon your men, and be glad Ben Gillam is not here to kill more of you as he killed your super-cargo!"

Half an hour from the time we had entered the fort, keys, arms, and ammunition were in M. de Radisson's hands without the firing of a shot, and the unarmed New Englanders assigned to the main building, where we could lock them if they mutinied.  To sound of trumpet and drum, with Godefroy bobbing his tipstaff, M. Radisson must needs run up the French flag in place of the pirate ensign.  Then, with the lieutenant and two New Englanders to witness capitulation, he marched from the gates to do the same with the ship.  Allemand and Godefroy kept sentinel duty at the gates.  La Chesnaye, Forêt, and Jack Battle held the bastions, and the rest stood guard in front of the main building.

From my place I saw how it happened.

The lieutenant stepped back to let M. de Radisson pass up the ship's ladder first.  The New Englanders followed, the lieutenant still waiting at the bottom step; and when M. Radisson's back was turned the lieutenant darted down the river bank in the direction of Governor Brigdar's fort.

The flag went up and M. Radisson looked back to witness the salute. Then he discovered the lieutenant's flight.  The New Englanders' purpose was easily guessed--to lock forces with Governor Brigdar, and while our strength was divided attack us here or at the Habitation.

"One fight at a time," says Radisson, summoning to council in the powder-house all hands but our guard at the gate.  "You, Allemand and Godefroy, will cross the marsh to-night, bidding Chouart be ready for attack and send back re-enforcements here!  You two lads"--pointing to the stowaway and scullion--"will boil down bears' grease and porpoise fat for a half a hundred cressets!  Cut up all the brooms in the fort! Use pine-boughs!  Split the green wood and slip in oiled rags!  Have a hundred lights ready by ten of the clock!  Go--make haste, or I throw you both into the pot!

"You, Forêt and La Chesnaye, transfer all the New Englanders to the hold of the ship and batten them under!  If there's to be fighting, let the enemies be outside the walls.  And you, Ramsay, will keep guard at the river bastion all night!  And you, Jack Battle, will gather all the hats and helmets and caps in the fort, and divide them equally between the two front bastions----"

"Hats and helmets?" interrupts La Chesnaye.

"La Chesnaye," says M. Radisson, whirling, "an any one would question me this night he had best pull his tongue out with the tongs!  Go, all of you!"

But Godefroy, ever a dour-headed knave, must test the steel of M. de Radisson's mood.

"D'ye mean me an' the pilot to risk crossing the marsh by night----"

But he got no farther.  M. de Radisson was upon him with a cudgel like a flail on wheat.

"An you think it risk to go, I'll make it greater risk to stay!  An you fear to obey, I'll make you fear more to disobey!  An you shirk the pain of toeing the scratch, I'll make it a deal more painful to lag behind!"

"But at night--at night," roared Godefroy between blows.

"The night--knave," hissed out Radisson, "the night is lighter than morning with the north light.  The night"--this with a last drive--"the night is same as day to man of spirit!  'Tis the sort of encouragement half the world needs to succeed," said M. Radisson, throwing down the cudgel.

And Godefroy, the skulker, was glad to run for the marsh.  The rest of us waited no urgings, but were to our posts on the run.

I saw M. Radisson passing fife, piccolo, trumpet, and drum to the two tatterdemalion lads of our army.

"Now blow like fiends when I give the word," said he.

Across the courtyard, single file, marched the New Englanders from barracks to boat.  La Chesnaye leading with drawn sword, the marquis following with pointed musket.

Forêt and La Chesnaye then mounted guard at the gate.  The sailor of our company was heaping cannon-balls ready for use.  Jack Battle scoured the fort for odd headgear.  M. de Radisson was everywhere, seizing papers, burying ammunition, making fast loose stockades, putting extra rivets in hinges, and issuing quick orders that sent Jack Battle skipping to the word.  Then Jack was set to planting double rows of sticks inside on a level with the wall.  The purpose of these I could not guess till M. Radisson ordered hat, helmet, or cap clapped atop of each pole.

Oh, we were a formidable army, I warrant you, seen by any one mounting the drift to spy across our walls!

But 'twas no burlesque that night, as you may know when I tell you that Governor Brigdar's forces played us such a trick they were under shelter of the ship before we had discovered them.

Forêt and La Chesnaye were watching from loopholes at the gates, and I was all alert from my place in the bastion.  The northern lights waved overhead in a restless ocean of rose-tinted fire.  Against the blue, stars were aglint with the twinkle of a million harbour lights.  Below, lay the frost mist, white as foam, diaphanous as a veil, every floating icy particle aglimmer with star rays like spray in sunlight.  Through the night air came the far howlings of the running wolf-pack.  The little ermine, darting across the level with its black tail-tip marking the snow in dots and dashes, would sit up quickly, listen and dive under, to wriggle forward like a snake; or the black-eyed hare would scurry off to cover of brushwood.

Of a sudden sounded such a yelling from the New Englanders imprisoned in the ship, with a beating of guns on the keel, that I gave quick alarm.  Forêt and La Chesnaye sallied from the gate.  Pistol-shots rang out as they rounded the ship's prow into shadow.  At the same instant, a man flung forward out of the frost cloud beating for admittance.   M. de Radisson opened.

"The Indians!  The Indians!  Where are the New Englanders?" cried the man, pitching headlong in.

And when he regained his feet, Governor Brigdar, of the Hudson's Bay Company, stood face to face with M. de Radisson.

"A right warm welcome, Your Excellency," bowed M. de Radisson, bolting the gate.  "The New Englanders are in safe keeping, sir, and so are you!"

The bewildered governor gasped at M. Radisson's words.  Then he lost all command of himself.

"Radisson, man," he stormed, "this is no feint--this is no time for acting!  Six o' my men shot on the way--four hiding by the ship and the Indians not a hundred yards behind!  Take my sword and pistol," he proffered, M. de Radisson still hesitating, "but as you hope for eternal mercy, call in my four men!"

After that, all was confusion.


Forêt and the marquis rushed pell-mell for the fort with four terrified Englishmen disarmed.  The gates were clapped to.  Myriad figures darted from the frost mist--figures with war-paint on their faces and bodies clothed in white to disguise approach.  English and French, enemies all, crouched to the palisades against the common foe, with sword-thrust for the hands catching at pickets to scale the wall and volleying shots that scattered assailants back.  The redskins were now plainly visible through the frost.  When they swerved away from shelter of the ship, every bastion let go the roar of a cannon discharge. There was the sudden silence of a drawing off, then the shrill "Ah-o-o-o-oh!  Ah-o-o-o-oh!  Ah-o-o-o-oh!" of Indian war-cry!

And M. Radisson gave the signal.

Instantaneously half a hundred lights were aflare.  Red tongues of fire darted from the loop-holes.  Two lads were obeying our leader's call to run--run--run, blowing fife, beating drum like an army's band, while streams of boiling grease poured down from bastions and lookout. Helmets, hats, and caps sticking round on the poles were lighted up like the heads of a battalion; and oft as any of us showed himself he displayed fresh cap.  One Indian, I mind, got a stockade off and an arm inside the wall.  That arm was never withdrawn, for M. Radisson's broadsword came down, and the Indian reeled back with a yelping scream. Then the smoke cleared, and I saw what will stay with me as long as memory lasts--M. Radisson, target for arrows or shot, long hair flying and red doublet alight in the flare of the torches, was standing on top of the pickets with his right arm waving a sword.

"Whom do you make them out to be, Ramsay?" he called.  "Is not yon Le Borgne?"

I looked to the Indians.  Le Borgne it was, thin and straight, like a mast-pole through mist, in conference with another man--a man with a beard, a man who was no Indian.

"Sir!" I shouted back.  "Those are the inland pirates.  They are leading the Indians against Ben Gillam, and not against us at all."

At that M. Radisson extends a handkerchief on the end of his sword as flag of truce, and the bearded man waves back.  Down from the wall jumps M. Radisson, running forward fearlessly where Indians lay wounded, and waving for the enemy to come.  But the two only waved back in friendly fashion, wheeled their forces off, and disappeared through the frost.

"Those were Ben Gillam's cut-throats trying to do for him!  When they saw us on the walls, they knew their mistake," says M. de Radisson as he re-entered the gate.  "There's only one way to find those pirates out, Ramsay.  Nurse these wounded Indians back to life, visit the tribe, and watch!  After Chouart's re-enforcements come, I'll send you and Jack Battle, with Godefroy for interpreter!"

To Governor Brigdar and his four refugees M. de Radisson was all courtesy.

"And how comes Your Excellency to be out so late with ten men?" he asked, as we supped that night.

"We heard that you were here.  We were coming to visit you," stammered Governor Brigdar, growing red.

"Then let us make you so welcome that you will not hasten away!  Here, Jack Battle, here, fellow, stack these gentlemen's swords and pistols where they'll come to no harm!  Ah!  No?  But I must relieve you, gentlemen!  Your coming was a miracle.  I thank you for it.  It has saved us much trouble.  A pledge to the pleasure--and the length--of your stay, gentlemen," and they stand to the toast, M. de Radisson smiling at the lights in his wine.

But we all knew very well what such welcome meant.  'Twas Radisson's humour to play the host that night, but the runaway lieutenant was a prisoner in our guard-house.