WE SEEK THE INLANDERS

In the matter of fighting, I find small difference between white-men and red.  Let the lust of conquest but burn, the justice of the quarrel receives small thought.  Your fire-eating prophet cares little for the right of the cause, provided the fighter come out conqueror; and many a poet praises only that right which is might over-trampling weakness.  I have heard the withered hag of an Indian camp chant as spirited war-song as your minstrels of butchery; but the strange thing of it is, that the people, who have taken the sword in a wantonness of conquest, are the races that have been swept from the face of the earth like dead leaves before the winter blast; but the people, who have held immutably by the power of right, which our Lord Christ set up, the meek and the peace-makers and the children of God, these are they that inherit the earth.

Where are the tribes with whom Godefroy and Jack Battle and I wandered in nomadic life over the northern wastes?  Buried in oblivion black as night, but for the lurid memories flashed down to you of later generations.  Where are the Puritan folk, with their cast-iron, narrow creeds damning all creation but themselves, with their foibles of snivelling to attest sanctity, with such a wolfish zeal to hound down devils that they hounded innocents for witchcraft?  Spreading over the face of the New World, making the desert to bloom and the waste places fruitful gardens?  And the reason for it all is simply this: Your butchering Indian, like your swashing cavalier, founded his _right_ upon _might_; your Puritan, grim but faithful, to the outermost bounds of his tragic errors, founded his _might_ upon _right_.

We learn our hardest lessons from unlikeliest masters.  This one came to me from the Indians of the blood-dyed northern snows.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

"Don't show your faces till you have something to report about those pirates, who led the Indians," was M. Radisson's last command, as we sallied from the New Englanders' fort with a firing of cannon and beating of drums.

Godefroy, the trader, muttered under his breath that M. Radisson need never fear eternal torment.

"Why?" I asked.

"Because, if he goes _there_," answered Godefroy, "he'll get the better o' the Nick."

I think the fellow was smarting from recent punishment.  He and Allemand, the drunken pilot, had been draining gin kegs on the sly and replacing what they took with snow water.  That last morning at prayers Godefroy, who was half-seas over, must yelp out a loud "Amen" in the wrong place.  Without rising from his knees, or as much as changing his tone, M. de Radisson brought the drunken knave such a cuff it flattened him to the floor.

Then prayers went on as before.

The Indians, whom we had nursed of their wounds, were to lead us to the tribe, one only being held by M. Radisson as hostage for safe conduct. In my mind, that trust to the Indians' honour was the single mistake M. Radisson made in the winter's campaign.  In the first place, the Indian has no honour.  Why should he have, when his only standard of right is conquest?  In the second place, kindness is regarded as weakness by the Indian.  Why should it not be, when his only god is victory?  In the third place, the lust of blood, to kill, to butcher, to mutilate, still surged as hot in their veins as on the night when they had attempted to scale our walls.  And again I ask why not, when the law of their life was to kill or to be killed?  These questions I put to you because life put them to me.  At the time my father died, the gentlemen of King Charles's court were already affecting that refinement of philosophy which justifies despotism.  From justifying despotism, 'twas but a step to justifying the wicked acts of tyranny; and from that, but another step to thrusting God's laws aside as too obsolete for our clever courtiers.  "Give your unbroken colt tether enough to pull itself up with one sharp fall," M. Radisson used to say, "and it will never run to the end of its line again."

The mind of Europe spun the tissue of foolish philosophy.  The savage of the wilderness went the full tether; and I leave you to judge whether the _might_ that is _right_ or the _right_ that is _might_ be the better creed for a people.

But I do not mean to imply that M. Radisson did not understand the savages better than any man of us in the fort.  He risked three men as pawns in the game he was playing for mastery of the fur trade. Gamester of the wilderness as he was, Pierre Radisson was not the man to court a certain loss.

The Indians led us to the lodges of the hostiles safely enough; and their return gave us entrance if not welcome to the tepee village.  We had entered a ravine and came on a cluster of wigwams to the lee side of a bluff.  Dusk hid our approach; and the absence of the dogs that usually infest Indian camps told us that these fellows were marauders. Smoke curled up from the poles crisscrossed at the tepee forks, but we could descry no figures against the tent-walls as in summer, for heavy skins of the chase overlaid the parchment.  All was silence but in one wigwam.  This was an enormous structure, built on poles long as a mast, with moose-hides scattered so thickly upon it that not a glint of firelight came through except the red glow of smoke at the peak.  There was a low hum of suppressed voices, then one voice alone in solemn tones, then guttural grunts of applause.

"In council," whispered Godefroy, steering straight for the bearskin that hung flapping across the entrance.

Bidding Jack Battle stand guard outside, we followed the Indians who had led us from the fort.  Lifting the tent-flap, we found ourselves inside.  A withered creature with snaky, tangled hair, toothless gums, eyes that burned like embers, and a haunched, shrivelled figure, stood gesticulating and crooning over a low monotone in the centre of the lodge.

As we entered, the draught from the door sent a tongue of flame darting to mid-air from the central fire, and scores of tawny faces with glance intent on the speaker were etched against the dark.  These were no camp families, but braves, deep in war council.  The elder men sat with crossed feet to the fore of the circle.  The young braves were behind, kneeling, standing, and stretched full length.  All were smoking their long-stemmed pipes and listening to the medicine-man, or seer, who was crooning his low-toned chant.  The air was black with smoke.

Always audacious, Godefroy, the trader, advanced boldly and sat down in the circle.  I kept back in shadow, for directly behind the Indian wizard was a figure lying face downward, chin resting in hand, which somehow reminded me of Le Borgne.  The fellow rolled lazily over, got to his knees, and stood up.  Pushing the wizard aside, this Indian faced the audience.  It was Le Borgne, his foxy eye yellow as flame, teeth snapping, and a tongue running at such a pace that we could scarce make out a word of his jargon.

"What does he say, Godefroy?"

"Sit down," whispered the trader, "you are safe."

This was what the Indian was saying as Godefroy muttered it over to me:

"Were the Indians fools and dogs to throw away two fish for the sake of one?  The French were friends of the Indians.  Let the Indians find out what the French would give them for killing the English.  He, Le Borgne, the one-eyed, was brave.  He would go to the Frenchman's fort and spy out how strong they were.  If the French gave them muskets for killing the English, after the ships left in the spring the Indians could attack the fort and kill the French.  The great medicine-man, the white hunter, who lived under the earth, would supply them with muskets----"

"He says the white hunter who lives under the earth is giving them muskets to make war," whispered Godefroy.  "That must be the pirate."

"Listen!"

"Let the braves prepare to meet the Indians of the Land of Little White Sticks, who were coming with furs for the white men--" Le Borgne went on.

"Let the braves send their runners over the hills to the Little White Sticks sleeping in the sheltered valley.  Let the braves creep through the mist of the morning like the lynx seeking the ermine.  And when the Little White Sticks were all asleep, the runners would shoot fire arrows into the air and the braves would slay--slay--slay the men, who might fight, the women, who might run to the whites for aid, and the children, who might live to tell tales."

"The devils!" says Godefroy under his breath.

A log broke on the coals with a flare that painted Le Borgne's evil face fiery red; and the fellow gabbled on, with figure crouching stealthily forward, foxy eye alight with evil, and teeth glistening.

"Let the braves seize the furs of the Little White Sticks, trade the furs to the white-man for muskets, massacre the English, then when the great white chief's big canoes left, kill the Frenchmen of the fort."

"Ha," says Godefroy.  "Jack's safe outside!  We'll have a care to serve you through the loop-holes, and trade you only broken muskets!"

A guttural grunt applauded Le Borgne's advice, and the crafty scoundrel continued: "The great medicine-man, the white hunter, who lived under the earth, was their friend.  Was he not here among them?  Let the braves hear what he advised."

The Indians grunted their approbation.  Some one stirred the fire to flame.  There was a shuffling movement among the figures in the dark. Involuntarily Godefroy and I had risen to our feet.  Emerging from the dusk to the firelight was a white man, gaudily clothed in tunic of scarlet with steel breastplates and gold lace enough for an ambassador. His face was hidden by Le Borgne's form.  Godefroy pushed too far forward; for the next thing, a shout of rage rent the tent roof.  Le Borgne was stamping out the fire.  A red form with averted face raced round the lodge wall to gain the door.  Then Godefroy and I were standing weapons in hand, with the band of infuriated braves brandishing tomahawks about our heads.  Le Borgne broke through the circle and confronted us with his face agleam.

"Le Borgne, you rascal, is this a way to treat your friends?" I demanded.

"What you--come for?" slowly snarled Le Borgne through set teeth.

"To bring back your wounded and for furs, you fool," cried Godefroy, "and if you don't call your braves off, you can sell no more pelts to the French."

Le Borgne gabbled out something that drove the braves back.

"We have no furs yet," said he.

"But you will have them when you raid the Little White Sticks," raged Godefroy, caring nothing for the harm his words might work if he saved his own scalp.

Le Borgne drew off to confer with the braves.  Then he came back and there was a treacherous smile of welcome on his bronze face.

"The Indians thought the white-men spies from the Little White Sticks," he explained in the mellow, rhythmic tones of the redman.  "The Indians were in war council.  The Indians are friends of the French."

"Look out for him, Godefroy," said I.

"If the French are friends to the Indians, let the white-men come to battle against the Little White Sticks," added Le Borgne.

"Tell him no!  We'll wait here till they come back!"

"He says they are not coming back," answered Godefroy, "and hang me, Ramsay, an I'd not face an Indian massacre before I go back empty-handed to M. Radisson.  We're in for it," says he, speaking English too quick for Le Borgne's ear.  "If we show the white feather now, they'll finish us.  They'll not harm us till they've done for the English and got more muskets.  And that red pirate is after these same furs!  Body o' me, an you hang back, scared o' battle, you'd best not come to the wilderness."

"The white-men will go with the Indians, but the white-men will not fight with the Little Sticks," announced Godefroy to Le Borgne, proffering tobacco enough to pacify the tribe.

'Twas in vain that I expostulated against the risk of going far inland with hostiles, who had attacked the New England fort and were even now planning the slaughter of white-men.  Inoffensiveness is the most deadly of offences with savagery, whether the savagery be of white men or red.  Le Borgne had the insolence to ask why the tribe could not as easily kill us where we were as farther inland; and we saw that remonstrances were working the evil that we wished to avoid--increasing the Indians' daring.  After all, Godefroy was right.  The man who fears death should neither go to the wilderness nor launch his canoe above a whirlpool unless he is prepared to run the rapids.  This New World had never been won from darkness if men had hung back from fear of spilt blood.

'Twas but a moment's work for the braves to deck out in war-gear. Faces were blackened with red streaks typifying wounds; bodies clad in caribou skins or ermine-pelts white as the snow to be crossed; quivers of barbed and poisonous arrows hanging over their backs in otter and beaver skins; powder in buffalo-horns for those who had muskets; shields of toughened hide on one arm, and such a number of scalp-locks fringing every seam as told their own story of murderous foray.  While the land still smoked under morning frost and the stars yet pricked through the gray darkness, the warriors were far afield coasting the snow-billows as on tireless wings.  Up the swelling drifts water-waved by wind like a rolling sea, down cliffs crumbling over with snowy cornices, across the icy marshes swept glare by the gales, the braves pressed relentlessly on.  Godefroy, Jack Battle, and I would have hung to the rear and slipped away if we could; but the fate of an old man was warning enough.  Muttering against the braves for embroiling themselves in war without cause, he fell away from the marauders as if to leave.  Le Borgne's foxy eye saw the move.  Turning, he rushed at the old man with a hiss of air through his teeth like a whistling arrow.  His musket swung up.  It clubbed down.  There was a groan; and as we rounded a bluff at a pace that brought the air cutting in our faces, I saw the old man's body lying motionless on the snow.

If this was the beginning, what was the end?

Godefroy vowed that the man was only an Indian, and his death was no sin.

"The wolves would 'a' picked his bones soon anyway.  He wore a score o' scalps at his belt.  Pah, an we could get furs without any Indians, I'd see all their skulls go!" snapped the trader.

"If killing's no murder, whose turn comes next?" asked Jack.

And that gave Godefroy pause.