AT OXFORD

Rioting through London streets or playing second in M. Radisson's games of empire, it was possible to forget her, but not in Oxford with the court retinue all about and the hedgerows abloom and spring-time in the air.  M. Radisson had gone to present his reports to the king.  With a vague belief that chance might work some miracle, I accompanied M. Radisson till we encountered the first belaced fellow of the King's Guard.  'Twas outside the porter's lodge of the grand house where the king had been pleased to breakfast that morning.

"And what might this young man want?" demanded the fellow, with lordly belligerence, letting M. Radisson pass without question.

Your colonial hero will face the desperate chance of death; but not the smug arrogance of a beliveried flunkey.

"Wait here," says M. Radisson to me, forgetful of Hortense now that his own end was won.

And I struck through the copse-wood, telling myself that chance makes grim sport.  Ah, well, the toughening of the wilderness is not to be undone by fickle fingers, however dainty, nor a strong life blown out by a girl's caprice!  Riders went clanking past.  I did not turn.  Let those that honoured dishonour doff hats to that company of loose women and dissolute men!  Hortense was welcome to the womanish men and the mannish women, to her dandified lieutenant and foreign adventuresses and grand ambassadors, who bought English honour with the smiles of evil women.  Coming to a high stone wall, I saw two riders galloping across the open field for the copse wood.

"A very good place to break foolish necks," thought I; for the riders were coming straight towards me, and a deep ditch ran along the other side of the wall.

To clear the wall and then the ditch would be easy enough; but to clear the ditch and then the wall required as pretty a piece of foolhardy horsemanship as hunters could find.  Out of sheer curiosity to see the end I slackened my walk.  A woman in green was leading the pace.  The man behind was shouting "Don't try it!  Don't try it!  Ride round the end!  Wait!  Wait!"  But the woman came on as if her horse had the bit. Then all my mighty, cool stoicism began thumping like a smith's forge. The woman was Hortense, with that daring look on her face I had seen come to it in the north land; and her escort, young Lieutenant Blood, with terror as plainly writ on his fan-shaped elbows and pounding gait as if his horse were galloping to perdition.

"Don't jump!  Head about, Mistress Hillary!" cried the lieutenant.

But Hortense's lips tightened, the rein tightened, there was that lifting bound into air when horse and rider are one--the quick paying-out of the rein--the long, stretching leap--the backward brace--and the wall had been cleared.  But Blood's horse balked the jump, nigh sending him head over into the moat, and seizing the bit, carried its cursing rider down the slope of the field.  In vain the lieutenant beat it about the head and dug the spurs deep.  The beast sidled off each time he headed it up, or plunged at the water's edge till Mistress Hortense cried out: "Oh--please!  I cannot see you risk yourself on that beast!  Oh--please won't you ride farther down where I can get back!"

"Ho--away, then," calls Blood, mighty glad of that way out of his predicament, "but don't try the wall here again, Mistress Hillary!  I protest 'tis not safe for you!  Ho--away, then!  I race you to the end of the wall!"

And off he gallops, never looking back, keen to clear the wall and meet my lady half-way up.  Hortense sat erect, reining her horse and smiling at me.

"And so you would go away without seeing me," she said, "and I must needs ride you down at the risk of the lieutenant's neck."

"'Tis the way of the proud with the humble," I laughed back; but the laugh had no mirth.

Her face went grave.  She sat gazing at me with that straight, honest look of the wilderness which neither lies nor seeks a lie.

"Your horse is champing to be off, Hortense!"

"Yes--and if you looked you might see that I am keeping him from going off."

I smiled at the poor jest as a court conceit.

"Or perhaps, if you tried, you might help me to hold him," says Hortense, never taking her search from my face.

"And defraud the lieutenant," said I.

"Ah!" says Hortense, looking away.  "Are you jealous of anything so small?"

I took hold of the bit and quieted the horse.  Hortense laughed.

"Were you so mighty proud the other night that you could not come to see a humble ward of the court?" she asked.

"I am only a poor trader now!"

"Ah," says Hortense, questioning my face again, "I had thought you were only a poor trader before!  Was that the only reason?"

"To be sure, Hortense, the lieutenant would not have welcomed me--he might have told his fellow to turn me out and made confusion."

And I related M. Radisson's morning encounter with Lieutenant Blood, whereat Mistress Hortense uttered such merry peals of laughter I had thought the chapel-bells were chiming.

"Ramsay!" she cried impetuously, "I hate this life--why did you all send me to it?"

"Hate it!  Why----?"

"Why?" reiterated Hortense.  "Why, when a king, who is too busy to sign death-reprieves, may spend the night hunting a single moth from room to room of the palace?  Why, when ladies of the court dress in men's clothes to run the streets with the Scowerers?  Why, when a duchess must take me every morning to a milliner's shop, where she meets her lover, who is a rope-walker?  Why, when our sailors starve unpaid and gold enough lies on the basset-table of a Sunday night to feed the army?  Ah, yes!" says Hortense, "why do I hate this life?  Why must you and Madame Radisson and Lady Kirke all push me here?"

"Hortense," I broke in, "you were a ward of the crown!  What else was there for us to do?"

"Ah, yes!" says Hortense, "what else?  You kept your promise, and a ward of the crown must marry whom the king names--"

"Marry?"

"Or--or go to a nunnery abroad."

"A nunnery?"

"Ah, yes!" mocks Hortense, "what else is there to do?"

And at that comes Blood crashing through the brush.

"Here, fellow, hands off that bridle!"

"The horse became restless.  This gentleman held him for me till you came."

"Gad's life!" cries the lieutenant, dismounting.  "Let's see?"  And he examines the girths with a great show of concern.  "A nasty tumble," says he, as if Hortense had been rolled on.  "All sound, Mistress Hillary!  Egad!  You must not ride such a wild beast!  I protest, such risks are too desperate!"  And he casts up the whites of his eyes at Mistress Hortense, laying his hand on his heart.  "When did you feel him getting away from you?"

"At the wall," says Hortense.

The lieutenant vaulted to his saddle.

"Here, fellow!"

He had tossed me a gold-piece.  They were off.  I lifted the coin, balanced it on my thumb, and flipped it ringing against the wall.  When I looked up, Hortense was laughing back over her shoulder.


On May 17th we sailed from Gravesend in the Happy Return, two ships accompanying us for Hudson Bay, and a convoy of the Royal Marine coming as far as the north of Scotland to stand off Dutch highwaymen and Spanish pirates.

But I made the news of Jack Battle's marriage the occasion of a letter to one of the queen's maids of honour.