REBECCA AND JACK BATTLE CONSPIRE

'Twas cockcrow when I left pacing the shore where we had so often played in childhood; and through the darkness came the howl of M. Picot's hound, scratching outside the prison gate.

As well reason with maniacs as fanatics, say I, for they hide as much folly under the mask of conscience as ever court fool wore 'neath painted face.  There was Mr. Stocking, as well-meaning a man as trod earth, obdurate beyond persuasion against poor M. Picot under his charge.  Might I not speak to the French doctor through the bars of his window?  By no means, Mr. Stocking assured.  If once the great door were unlocked, who could tell what black arts a sorcerer might use?

"Look you, Ramsay lad," says he, "I've had this brass key made against his witchcraft, and I do not trust it to the hands of the jailer."

Then, I fear, I pleaded too keenly; for, suspecting collusion with M. Picot, the warden of the court-house grew frigid and bade me ask Eli Kirke's opinion on witchcraft.

"'Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,'" rasped Eli Kirke, his stern eyes ablaze from an inner fire.  "'A man' also, or woman, that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death.' Think you M. Picot burns incense to the serpent in his jars for the healing of mankind?" he demanded fiercely.

"Yes," said I, "'tis for the healing of mankind by experimentation with chemicals.  Knowledge of God nor chemicals springs full grown from man's head, Uncle Eli.  Both must be learned.  That is all the meaning of his jars and crucibles.  He is only trying to learn what laws God ordained among materials.  And when M. Picot makes mistakes, it is the same as when the Church makes mistakes and learns wisdom by blunders."

Eli Kirke blinked his eyes as though my monstrous pleadings dazed him.

"'Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,'" he cried doggedly.  "Do the Scriptures lie, Ramsay Stanhope?  Tell me that?"

"No," said I.  "The Scriptures condemn liars, and the man who pretends witchcraft _is_ a liar.  There's no such thing.  That is why the Scriptures command burning."  I paused.  He made no answer, and I pleaded on.

"But M. Picot denies witchcraft, and you would burn him for not lying."

Never think to gain a stubborn antagonist by partial concession.  M. Radisson used to say if you give an enemy an inch he will claim an ell. 'Twas so with Eli Kirke, for he leaped to his feet in a fine frenzy and bade me cease juggling Holy Writ.

"'Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,'" he shouted.  "'Tis abomination!  It shall utterly be put away from you!  Because of this hidden iniquity the colony hath fallen on evil days.  Let it perish root and branch!"

But Tibbie breaks in upon his declamation by throwing wide the library door, and in marches a line of pale-faced ascetics, rigid of jaw, cold of eye, and exalted with that gloomy fervour which counts burning life's highest joy.  Among them was the famous witch-hanger of after years, a mere youth then, but about his lips the hard lines of a spiritual zeal scarce differing from pride.

"God was awakening the churches by marvellous signs," said one, extending a lank, cold hand to salute Eli Kirke.

"Have we not wrestled mightily for signs and wonders?" demanded another with jaw of steel.  And one description of the generation seeking signs was all but off the tip of my tongue.

"Some aver there be no witches--so fearfully hath error gone abroad," lamented young Mather, keen to be heard then, as he always was. "Brethren, toleration would make a kingdom of chaos, a Sodom, a Gomorrah, a Babylon!"

Faith, it needed no horoscope to forecast that young divine's dark future!

I stood it as long as I could, with palms itching to knock their solemn heads together like so many bowling balls; but when one cadaverous-faced fellow, whose sanctity had gone bilious from lack of sunshine, whined out against "the saucy miss," meaning thereby Mistress Hortense, and another prayed Heaven through his nose that his daughter might "lie in her grave ere she minced her steps with such dissoluteness of hair and unseemly broideries and bright colours, showing the lightness of her mind," and a third averred that "a cucking-stool would teach a maid to walk more shamefacedly," I whirled upon them in a fury that had disinherited me from Eli Kirke's graces ere I spake ten words.

"Sirs," said I, "your slatternly wenches may be dead ere they match Mistress Hortense!  As for wearing light colours, the devil himself is painted black.  Let them who are doing shameful acts to the innocent walk shamefacedly!  For shame, sirs, to cloak malice and jealousy of M. Picot under religion!  New England will remember this blot against you and curse you for it!  An you listen to Deliverance Dobbins's lies, what hinders any lying wench sending good men to the scaffold?"

At first they listened agape, but now the hot blood rushed to their faces.

"Hold thy tongue, lad!" roared Eli Kirke.  Then, as if to atone for that violence: "The Lord rebuke thee," he added solemnly.

And I flung from the house dumb with impotent rage.

My thoughts were as the snatched sleep of a sick man's dreams.  Again the hideous nightmare of the old martyr at the shambles; but now the shambles were in the New World and the martyr was M. Picot.  Something cold touched my hand through the dark, and there crouched M. Picot's hound, whining for its master.  Automatically I followed across the commons to the court-house square.  It stopped at the prison gate, sniffing and whining and begging in.  Poor dog!  What could I do?  I tried to coax it away, but it lay at the wall like a stone.

Of the long service in the new-built meeting-house I remember very little.  Beat of drums, not bells, called to church in those days, and the beat was to me as a funeral march.  The pale face of the preacher in the high pulpit overtowering us all was alight with stern zeal.  The elders, sitting in a row below the pulpit facing us, listened to the fierce diatribe against the dark arts with looks of approbation that boded ill for M. Picot; and at every fresh fusillade of texts to bolster his argument, the line of deacons below the elders glanced back at the preacher approvingly.  Rebecca sat on that side of the congregation assigned to the women with a dumb look of sympathy on the sweet hooded face.  The prisoners were not present.  At the end of the service the preacher paused; and there fell a great hush in which men scarce breathed, for sentence was to be pronounced.  But the preacher only announced that before handing the case to the civil court of oyer and terminer for judgment, the elders wished to hold it in meditation for another day.

The singing of the dismissal psalm began and a smothered cry seemed to break from Rebecca's pew.  Then the preacher had raised his hands above bowed heads.  The service was over.  The people crowded solemnly out, and I was left alone in the gathering darkness--alone with the ghosts of youth's illusions mocking from the gloom.  Religion, then, did not always mean right!  There were tyrants of souls as well as tyrants of sword.  Prayers were uttered that were fitter for hearing in hell than in Heaven.  Good men could deceive themselves into crime cloaking spiritual malice, sect jealousy, race hatred with an unctuous text. Here, in New England, where men had come for freedom, was tyranny masking in the guise of religion.  Preachers as jealous of the power slipping from their hands as ever was primate of England!  A poor gentleman hounded to his death because he practised the sciences! Millions of victims all the world over burned for witchcraft, sacrificed to a Moloch of superstition in the name of a Christ who came to let in the light of knowledge on all superstition!

Could I have found a wilderness where was no human face, I think I had fled to it that night.  And, indeed, when you come to think of my breaking with Eli Kirke, 'twas the witch trial that drove me to the wilderness.

There was yet a respite.  But the Church still dominated the civil courts, and a transfer of the case meant that the Church would throw the onus of executing sentence on those lay figures who were the puppets of a Pharisaical oligarchy.

There was no time to appeal to England.  There was no chance of sudden rescue.  New England had not the stuff of which mobs are made.

I thought of appealing to the mercy of the judges; but what mercy had Eli Kirke received at the hands of royalists that he should be merciful to them?

I thought of firing the prison; but the walls were stone, and the night wet, and the outcome doubtful.

I thought of the cell window; but if there had been any hope that way, M. Picot had worked an escape.

Bowing my head to think--to pray--to imprecate, I lost all sense of time and place.  Some one had slipped quietly into the dark of the church.  I felt rather than saw a nearing presence.  But I paid no heed, for despair blotted out all thought.  Whoever it was came feeling a way down the dark aisle.

Then hot tears fell upon my hands.  In the gloom there paused a childlike figure.

"Rebecca!"

She panted out a wordless cry.  Then she came closer and laid a hand on my arm.  She was struggling to subdue sobs.  The question came in a shivering breath.

"Is Hortense--so dear?"

"So dear, Rebecca."

"She must be wondrous happy, Ramsay." A tumult of effort.  "If I could only take her place----"

"Take her place, Rebecca?"

"My father hath the key--if--if--if I took her place, she might go free."

"Take her place, child!  What folly is this--dear, kind Rebecca?  Would 't be any better to send you to the rope than Hortense?  No--no--dear child!"

At that her agitation abated, and she puzzled as if to say more.

"Dear Rebecca," said I, comforting her as I would a sister, "dear child, run home.  Forget not little Hortense in thy prayers."

May the angel of forgiveness spread a broader mantle across our blunders than our sins, but could I have said worse?

"I have cooked dainties with my own hands.  I have sent her cakes every day," sobbed Rebecca.

"Go home now, Rebecca," I begged.

But she stood silent.

"Rebecca--what is it?"

"You have not been to see me for a year, Ramsay."

I could scarce believe my ears.

"My father is away to-night.  Will you not come?"

"But, Rebecca----"

"I have never asked a thing of you before."

"But, Rebecca----"

"Will you come for Hortense's sake?" she interrupted, with a little sharp, hard, falsetto note in her baby voice.

"Rebecca," I demanded, "what do you mean?"

But she snapped back like the peevish child that she was: "An you come not when I ask you, you may stay!"  And she had gone.

What was she trying to say with her dark hints and overnice scruples of a Puritan conscience?  And was not that Jack Battle greeting her outside in the dark?

I tore after Rebecca at such speed that I had cannoned into open arms before I saw a hulking form across the way.

"Fall-back--fall-edge!" roared Jack, closing his arms about me.  "'Tis Ramsay himself, with a sword like a butcher's cleaver and a wit like a broadaxe!"

"Have you not heard, Jack?"

"Heard!  Ship ahoy!" cried Jack.  "Split me to the chin like a cod! Stood I not abaft of you all day long, packed like a herring in a pickle!  'Twas a pretty kettle of fish in your Noah's ark to-day!  'Tis all along o' goodness gone stale from too much salt," says Jack.

I told him of little Rebecca, and asked what he made of it.  He said he made of it that fools didn't love in the right place--which was not to the point, whatever Jack thought of Rebecca.  Linking his arm through mine, he headed me about.

"Captain Gillam, Ben's father, sails for England at sunrise," vouched Jack.

"What has that to do with Mistress Hortense?" I returned testily.

"'Tis a swift ship to sail in."

"To sail in, Jack Battle?"--I caught at the hope.  "Out with your plan, man!"

"And be hanged for it," snaps Jack, falling silent.

We were opposite the prison.  He pointed to a light behind the bars.

"They are the only prisoners," he said.  "They must be in there."

"One could pass a note through those bars with a long pole," I observed, gazing over the yard wall.

"Or a key," answered Jack.

He paused before Rebecca's house to the left of the prison.

"Ramsay," inquired Jack quizzically, "do you happen to have heard who has the keys?"

"Rebecca's father is warden."

"And Rebecca's father is from home to-night," says he, facing me squarely to the lantern above the door.

How did he know that?  Then I remembered the voices outside the church.

"Jack--what did Rebecca mean----"

"Not to be hanged," interrupts Jack.  "'Tis all along o' having too much conscience, Ramsay.  They must either lie like a Dutchman and be damned, or tell the truth and be hanged.  Now, ship ahoy," says he, "to the quarterdeck!" and he flung me forcibly up the steps.

Rebecca, herself, red-eyed and reserved, threw wide the door.  She motioned me to a bench seat opposite the fireplace and fastened her gaze above the mantel till mine followed there too.  A bunch of keys hung from an iron rack.

"What are those, Rebecca?"

"The largest is for the gate," says she with the panic of conscience running from fire.  "The brass one unlocks the great door, and--and--the--M. Picot's cell unbolts," she stammered.

"May I examine them, Rebecca?"

"I will even draw you a pint of cider," says Rebecca evasively, with great trepidation, "but come back soon," she called, tripping off to the wine-cellar door.

Snatching the keys, I was down the steps at a leap.

"The large one for the gate, Jack!  The brass one for the big door, and the cell unbolts!"

"Ease your helm, sonny!" says Jack, catching the bunch from my clasp. "Fall-back--fall-edge!" he laughed in that awful mockery of the axeman's block.  "Fall-back--fall-edge!  If there's any hacking of necks, mine is thicker than yours!  I'll run the risks.  Do you wait here in shadow."

And he darted away.  The gate creaked as it gave.

Then I waited for what seemed eternity.

A night-watchman shuffled along with swinging lantern, calling out: "What ho?  What ho?"  Townsfolks rode through the streets with a clatter of the chairmen's feet; but no words were bandied by the fellows, for a Sabbath hush lay over the night.  A great hackney-coach nigh mired in mud as it lumbered through mid-road.  And M. Picot's hound came sniffing hungrily to me.

A glare of light shot aslant the dark.  Softly the door of Rebecca's house opened.  A frail figure was silhouetted against the light.  The wick above snuffed out.  The figure drew in without a single look, leaving the door ajar.  But an hour ago, the iron righteousness of bigots had filled my soul with revolt.  Now the sight of that little Puritan maid brought prayers to my lips and a Te Deum to my soul.

The prison gate swung open again with rusty protest.  Two hooded figures slipped through the dark.  Jack Battle had locked the gate and the keys were in my hand.

"Take them back," he gurgled out with school-lad glee.  "'Twill be a pretty to-do of witchcraft to-morrow when they find a cell empty.  Go hire passage to England in Captain Gillam's boat!"

"Captain Gillam's boat?"

"Yes, or Master Ben's pirate-ship of the north, if she's there," and he had dashed off in the dark.

When Rebecca appeared above the cellar-way with a flagon that reamed to a beaded top, the keys were back on the wall.

"I was overlong," panted Rebecca, with eyes averted as of old to the folds of her white stomacher.  "'Twas a stubborn bung and hard to draw."

"Dear little cheat!  God bless you!--and bless you!--and bless you, Rebecca!" I cried.

At which the poor child took fright.

"It--it--it was not all a lie, Ramsay," she stammered.  "The bung was hard--and--and--and I didn't hasten----"

"Dear comrade--good-bye, forever!" I called from the dark-of the step.

"Forever?" asked the faint voice of a forlorn figure black in the doorway.

Dear, snowy, self-sacrificing spirit--'tis my clearest memory of her with the thin, grieved voice coming through the dark.

I ran to the wharf hard as ever heels nerved by fear and joy and triumph and love could carry me.  The passage I easily engaged from the ship's mate, who dinned into my unlistening ears full account of the north sea, whither Captain Gillam was to go for the Fur Company, and whither, too, Master Ben was keen to sail, "a pirateer, along o' his own risk and gain," explained the mate with a wink, "pirateer or privateer, call 'em what you will, Mister; the Susan with white sails in Boston Town, and Le Bon Garçon with sails black as the devil himself up in Quebec, ha--ha--and I'll give ye odds on it, Mister, the devil himself don't catch Master Ben!  Why, bless you, gentlemen, who's to jail 'im here for droppin' Spanish gold in his own hold and poachin' furs on the king's preserve o' the north sea, when Stocking, the warden, 'imself owns 'alf the Susan and Cap'en Gillam, 'is father, is master o' the king's ship?"

"They do say," he babbled on, "now that Radisson, the French jack-a-boots, hath given the slip to the King's Company, he sails from Quebec in ship o' his own.  If him and Ben and the Capiten meet--oh, there'll be times!  There'll be times!"

And "times" there were sure enough; but of that I had then small care and shook the loquacious rascal off so that he left me in peace.

First came the servants, trundling cart-loads of cases, which passed unnoticed; for the town bell had tolled the close of Sabbath, and Monday shipping had begun.

The cusp of a watery moon faded in the gray dawn streaks of a muffled sky, and at last came the chairmen, with Jack running alert.

From the chairs stepped the blackamoor, painted as white as paste. Then a New Amsterdam gentleman slipped out from the curtains, followed by his page-boy and servants.

"Jack," I asked, "where is Hortense?"

The page glanced from under curls.

"Dear Jack," she whispered, standing high on her heels nigh as tall as the sailor lad.  And poor Jack Battle, not knowing how to play down, stood blushing, cap in hand, till she laughed a queer little laugh and, bidding him good-bye, told him to remember that she had the squirrel stuffed.

To me she said no word.  Her hand touched mine quick farewell.  The long lashes lifted.

There was a look on her face.

I ask no greater joy in Paradise than memory of that look.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

One lone, gray star hung over the masthead.  The ship careened across the billows till star and mast-top met.

Jack fetched a deep sigh.

"There be work for sailors in England," he said.

In a flash I thought that I knew what he had meant by fools not loving in the right place.

"That were folly, Jack!  She hath her station!"

Jack Battle pointed to the fading steel point above the vanishing masthead.

"Doth looking hurt yon star?" asks Jack.

"Nay; but looking may strain the eyes; and the arrows of longing come back void."

He answered nothing, and we lingered heavy hearted till the sun came up over the pillowed waves turning the tumbling waters to molten gold.

Between us and the fan-like rays behind the glossy billows--was no ship.

Hortense was safe!

There was an end-all to undared hopes.