M. DE RADISSON COMES TO HIS OWN

The sea was touched to silver by the rising sun--not the warm, red sun of southern climes, nor yet the gold light of the temperate zones, but the cold, clear steel of that great cold land where all the warring elements challenge man to combat.  Browned by the early frosts, with a glint of hoar rime on the cobwebs among the grasses, north, south, and west, as far as eye could see, were boundless reaches of hill and valley.  And over all lay the rich-toned shadows of early dawn.

The broad river raced not to meet the sea more swiftly than our pulses leaped at sight of that unclaimed world.  'Twas a kingdom waiting for its king.  And its king had come!  Flush with triumph, sniffing the nutty, autumn air like a war-horse keen for battle, stood M. Radisson all impatience for the conquest of new realms.  His jewelled sword-hilt glistened in the sun.  The fire that always slumbered in the deep-set eyes flashed to life; and, fetching a deep breath, he said a queer thing to Jean and me.

"'Tis good air, lads," says he; "'tis free!"

And I, who minded that bloody war in which my father lost his all, knew what the words meant, and drank deep.

But for the screaming of the birds there was silence of death.  And, indeed, it was death we had come to disenthrone.  M. Radisson issued orders quick on top of one another, and the sailors swarmed from the hold like bees from a hive.  The drum beat a roundelay that set our blood hopping.  There were trumpet-calls back and forth from our ship to the Ste. Anne.  Then, to a whacking of cables through blocks, the gig-boats touched water, and all hands were racing for the shore. Godefroy waved a monster flag--lilies of France, gold-wrought on cloth of silk--and Allemand kept beating--and beating--and beating the drum, rumbling out a "Vive le Roi!" to every stroke.  Before the keel gravelled on the beach, M. Radisson's foot was on the gunwale, and he leaped ashore.  Godefroy followed, flourishing the French flag and yelling at the top of his voice for the King of France.  Behind, wading and floundering through the water, came the rest.  Godefroy planted the flag-staff.  The two crews sent up a shout that startled those strange, primeval silences.  Then, M. Radisson stepped forward, hat in hand, whipped out his sword, and held it aloft.

"In the name of Louis the Great, King of France," he shouted, "in the name of His Most Christian Majesty, the King of France, I take possession of all these regions!"

At that, Chouart Groseillers shivered a bottle of wine against the flag-pole.  Drums beat, fifes shrieked as for battle, and lusty cheers for the king and Sieur Radisson rang and echoed and re-echoed from our crews.  Three times did Allemand beat his drum and three times did we cheer.  Then Pierre Radisson raised his sword.  Every man dropped to knee.  Catholics and Protestants, Calvinists and infidels, and riff-raff adventurers who had no religion but what they swore by, bowed their heads to the solemn thanks which Pierre Radisson uttered for safe deliverance from perilous voyage. 

That was my first experience of the fusion which the New World makes of Old World divisions.  We thought we had taken possession of the land. No, no, 'twas the land had taken possession of us, as the New World ever does, fusing ancient hates and rearing a new race, of which--I wot--no prophet may dare too much!

"He who twiddles his thumbs may gnaw his gums," M. Radisson was wont to say; and I assure you there was no twiddling of thumbs that morning. Bare had M. Radisson finished prayers, when he gave sharp command for Groseillers, his brother-in-law, to look to the building of the Habitation--as the French called their forts--while he himself would go up-stream to seek the Indians for trade.  Jean and Godefroy and I were sent to the ship for a birch canoe, which M. Radisson had brought from Quebec.

Our leader took the bow; Godefroy, the stern; Jean and I, the middle. A poise of the steel-shod steering pole, we grasped our paddles, a downward dip, quick followed by Godefroy at the stern, and out shot the canoe, swift, light, lithe, alert, like a racer to the bit, with a gurgling of waters below the gunwales, the keel athrob to the swirl of a turbulent current and a trail of eddies dimpling away on each side. A sharp breeze sprang up abeam, and M. Radisson ordered a blanket sail hoisted on the steersman's fishing-pole.  But if you think that he permitted idle paddles because a wind would do the work, you know not the ways of the great explorer.  He bade us ply the faster, till the canoe sped between earth and sky like an arrow shot on the level.  The shore-line became a blur.  Clumps of juniper and pine marched abreast, halted the length of time an eye could rest, and wheeled away.  The swift current raced to meet us.  The canoe jumped to mount the glossy waves raised by the beam wind.  An upward tilt of her prow, and we had skimmed the swell like a winged thing.  And all the while M. Radisson's eyes were everywhere.  Chips whirled past.  There were beaver, he said. Was the water suddenly muddied?  Deer had flitted at our approach.  Did a fish rise?  M. Radisson predicted otter; and where there were otter and beaver and deer, there should be Indians.

As for the rest of us, it had gone to our heads.

We were intoxicated with the wine of the rugged, new, free life.  Sky above; wild woods where never foot had trod; air that drew through the nostrils in thirst-quenching draughts; blood atingle to the laughing rhythm of the river--what wonder that youth leaped to a fresh life from the mummified existence of little, old peoples in little, old lands?

We laughed aloud from fulness of life.

Jean laid his paddle athwart, ripped off his buckskin, and smiled back.

"Ramsay feels as if he had room to stretch himself," said he.

"Feel!  I feel as if I could run a thousand miles and jump off the ends of the earth--"

"And dive to the bottom of the sea and harness whales and play bowling-balls with the spheres, you young rantipoles," added M. Radisson ironically.

"The fever of the adventurer," said Jean quietly.  "My uncle knows it."

I laughed again.  "I was wondering if Eli Kirke ever felt this way," I explained.

"Pardieu," retorted M. de Radisson, loosening his coat, "if people moved more and moped less, they'd brew small bile!  Come, lads!  Come, lads!  We waste time!"

And we were paddling again, in quick, light strokes, silent from zest, careless of toil, strenuous from love of it.

Once we came to a bend in the river where the current was so strong that we had dipped our paddles full five minutes against the mill race without gaining an inch.  The canoe squirmed like a hunter balking a hedge, and Jean's blade splintered off to the handle.  But M. de Radisson braced back to lighten the bow; the prow rose, a sweep of the paddles, and on we sped!

"Hard luck to pull and not gain a boat length," observed Jean.

"Harder luck not to pull, and to be swept back," corrected M. de Radisson.

We left the main river to thread a labyrinthine chain of waterways, where were portages over brambly shores and slippery rocks, with the pace set at a run by M. de Radisson.  Jean and I followed with the pack straps across our foreheads and the provisions on our backs.  Godefroy brought up the rear with the bark canoe above his head.

At one place, where we disembarked, M. de Radisson traced the sand with the muzzle of his musket.

"A boot-mark," said he, drawing the faint outlines of a footprint, "and egad, it's not a man's foot either!"

"Impossible!" cried Jean.  "We are a thousand miles from any white-man."

"There's nothing impossible on this earth," retorted Radisson impatiently.  "But pardieu, there are neither white women in this wilderness, nor ghosts wearing women's boots!  I'd give my right hand to know what left that mark!"

After that his haste grew feverish.  We snatched our meals by turns between paddles.  He seemed to grudge the waste of each night, camping late and launching early; and it was Godefroy's complaint that each portage was made so swiftly there was no time for that solace of the common voyageur--the boatman's pipe.  For eight days we travelled without seeing a sign of human presence but that one vague footmark in the sand.

"If there are no Indians, how much farther do we go, sir?" asked Godefroy sulkily on the eighth day.

"Till we find them," answered M. Radisson.

And we found them that night.

A deer broke from the woods edging the sand where we camped and had almost bounded across our fire when an Indian darted out a hundred yards behind.  Mistaking us for his own people, he whistled the hunter's signal to head the game back.  Then he saw that we were strangers.  Pulling up of a sudden, he threw back his arms, uttered a cry of surprise, and ran to the hiding of the bush.

M. Radisson was the first to pursue; but where the sand joined the thicket he paused and began tracing the point of his rapier round the outlines of a mark.

"What do you make of it, Godefroy?" he demanded of the trader.

The trader looked quizzically at Sieur de Radisson.

"The toes of that man's moccasin turn out," says Godefroy significantly.

"Then that man is no Indian," retorted M. Radisson, "and hang me, if the size is not that of a woman or a boy!"

And he led back to the beach.

"Yon ship was a pirate," began Godefroy, "and if buccaneers be about----"

"Hold your clack, fool," interrupted M. Radisson, as if the fellow's prattle had cut into his mental plannings; and he bade us heap such a fire as could be seen by Indians for a hundred miles.  "If once I can find the Indians," meditated he moodily, "I'll drive out a whole regiment of scoundrels with one snap o' my thumb!"

Black clouds rolled in from the distant bay, boding a stormy night; and Godefroy began to complain that black deeds were done in the dark, and we were forty leagues away from the protection of our ships.

"A pretty target that fire will make of us in the dark," whined the fellow.

M. Radisson's eyes glistened sparks.

"I'd as lief be a pirate myself, as be shot down by pirates," grumbled the trader, giving a hand to hoist the shed of sheet canvas that was to shield us from the rains now aslant against the seaward horizon.

At the words M. Radisson turned sharply; but the heedless fellow gabbled on.

"Where is a man to take cover, an the buccaneers began shooting from the bush behind?" demanded Godefroy belligerently.

M. Radisson reached one arm across the fire.  "I'll show you," said he. Taking Godefroy by the ear, with a prick of the sword he led the lazy knave quick march to the beach, where lay our canoe bottom up.

"Crawl under!"  M. Radisson lifted the prow.

From very shame--I think it was--Godefroy balked; but M. Radisson brought a cutting rap across the rascal's heels that made him hop.  The canoe clapped down, and Godefroy was safe.  "Pardieu," mutters Radisson, "such cowards would turn the marrow o' men's bones to butter!"

Sitting on a log, with his feet to the fire, he motioned Jean and me to come into the shelter of the slant canvas; for the clouds were rolling overhead black as ink and the wind roared up the river-bed with a wall of pelting rain.  M. Radisson gazed absently into the flame.  The steel lights were at play in his eyes, and his lips parted.

"Storm and cold--man and beast--powers of darkness and devil--knaves and fools and his own sins--he must fight them all, lads," says M. Radisson slowly.

"Who must fight them all?" asks Jean.

"The victor," answers Radisson, and warm red flashed to the surface of the cold steel in his eyes.

"Jean," he began, looking up quickly towards the gathering darkness of the woods.

"Sir?"

"'Tis cold enough for hunters to want a fire."

"Is the fire not big enough?"

"Now, where are your wits, lad?  If hunters were hiding in that bush, one could see this fire a long way off.  The wind is loud.  One could go close without being heard.  Pardieu, I'll wager a good scout could creep up to a log like this"--touching the pine on which we sat---"and hear every word we are saying without a soul being the wiser!"

Jean turned with a start, half-suspecting a spy.  Radisson laughed.

"Must I spell it out?  Eh, lad, afraid to go?"

The taunt bit home.  Without a word Jean and I rose.

"Keep far enough apart so that one of you will escape back with the news," called Radisson, as we plunged into the woods.

Of the one who might not escape Pierre Radisson gave small heed, and so did we.  Jean took the river side and I the inland thicket, feeling our way blindly through the blackness of forest and storm and night.  Then the rain broke--broke in lashing whip-cords with the crackle of fire. Jean whistled and I signalled back; but there was soon such a pounding of rains it drowned every sound.  For all the help one could give the other we might have been a thousand miles apart.  I looked back.  M. Radisson's fire threw a dull glare into the cavernous upper darkness. That was guide enough.  Jean could keep his course by the river.

It was plunging into a black nowhere.  The trees thinned.  I seemed to be running across the open, the rain driving me forward like a wet sail, a roar of wind in my ears and the words of M. Radisson ringing their battle-cry--"Storm and cold--man and beast--powers of darkness and devil--knaves and fools and his own sins--he must fight them all!"--"Who?"--"The victor!"

Of a sudden the dripping thicket gave back a glint.  Had I run in a circle and come again on M. Radisson's fire?  Behind, a dim glare still shone against the sky.

Another glint from the rain drip, and I dropped like a deer hit on the run.  Not a gunshot away was a hunter's fire.  Against the fire were three figures.  One stood with his face towards me, an Indian dressed in buckskin, the man who had pursued the deer.  The second was hid by an intervening tree; and as I watched, the third faded into the phaseless dark.  Who were these night-watchers?  I liked not that business of spying--though you may call it scouting, if you will, but I must either report nothing to M. Radisson, or find out more.

I turned to skirt the group.  A pistol-shot rang through the wood.  A sword flashed to light.  Before I had time to think, but not--thanks to M. Picot's lessons long ago--not before I had my own rapier out, an assassin blade would have taken me unawares.

I was on guard.  Steel struck fire in red spots as it clashed against steel.  One thrust, I know, touched home; for the pistol went whirling out of my adversary's hand, and his sword came through the dark with the hiss of a serpent.  Again I seemed to be in Boston Town; but the hunting room had become a northland forest, M. Picot, a bearded man with his back to the fire and his face in the dark, and our slim foils, naked swords that pressed and parried and thrust in many a foul such as the French doctor had taught me was a trick of the infamous Blood! Indeed, I could have sworn that a woman's voice cried out through the dark; but the rain was in my face and a sword striking red against my own.  Thanks, yes, thanks a thousand times to M. Picot's lessons; for again and yet again I foiled that lunge of the unscrupulous swordsman till I heard my adversary swearing, between clinched teeth.  He retreated.  I followed.  By a dexterous spring he put himself under cover of the woods, leaving me in the open.  My only practice in swordsmanship had been with M. Picot, and it was not till long years after that I minded how those lessons seemed to forestall and counter the moves of that ambushed assassin.  But the baffling thing was that my enemy's moves countered mine in the very same way.

He had not seen my face, for my back was turned when he came up, and my face in the shade when I whirled.  But I stood between the dark and the fire.  Every motion of mine he could forecast, while I could but parry and retreat, striving in vain to lure him out, to get into the dark, to strike what I could not see, pushed back and back till I felt the rush that aims not to disarm but to slay.

Our weapons rang with a glint of green lightnings.  A piece of steel flew up.  My rapier had snapped short at the hilt.  A cold point was at my throat pressing me down and back as the foil had caught me that night in M. Picot's house.  To right, to left, I swerved, the last blind rushes of the fugitive man. . . .

"Storm and cold--man and beast--powers of darkness and devil--he must fight them all----"

The memory of those words spurred like a battle-cry.  Beaten?  Not yet! "Leap to meet it!  Leap to meet it!"

I caught the blade at my throat with a naked hand.  Hot floods drenched my face.  The earth swam.  We were both in the light now, a bearded man pushing his sword through my hand, and I falling down.  Then my antagonist leaped back with a shivering cry of horror, flung the weapon to the ground and fled into the dark.

And when I sat up my right hand held the hilt of a broken rapier, the left was gashed across the palm, and a sword as like my own as two peas lay at my feet.

The fire was there.  But I was alone.


 Reference to M. Radisson's journal corroborates Mr. Stanhope in this observance, which was never neglected by M. Radisson after season of peril.  It is to be noted that he made his prayers after not at the season of peril.