 GEDGE TELLS THE TRUTH.

"Yesterday six years ago!" he echoed, looking at me in blank bewilderment.  "What do you mean?"

"I mean that if what you've told me is really the truth," I cried, agape in wonder, "then it is the most astounding thing I've ever heard of. Are you absolutely certain of the date?"

"Certain?  Why, of course."

"Of the year, I mean?"

"Positive.  It's eighteen ninety-six."

"For how long, then, have you been my secretary?"  I inquired.

"Nearly five years."

"And how long have I lived in this place?"

"For nearly four."

"And that woman," I demanded, breathlessly--"is she actually my wife?"

"Most certainly," he answered.

I stood stupefied, stunned by this amazing statement.

"But," I protested, lost in wonder, "yesterday was years ago.  How do you account for that?  Are you certain that you're not deceiving me?"

"I've told you the absolute truth," he responded.  "On that I stake my honour."

I stood aghast, glaring at my reflection in the mirror, open-mouthed, as though I gazed upon some object supernatural.  My personal appearance had certainly changed, and that in itself convinced me that there must be some truth in this man Gedge's statement.  I was older, a trifle stouter than before, I think, and my red-brown beard seemed to give my face a remarkably grotesque appearance.  I had always hated beards, and considered them a relic of prehistoric barbarity.  It was surprising that I should now have grown one.

"Then according to your account I must have spent yesterday here-- actually in this house?"

"Why, of course you did," he responded.  "We were engaged the greater part of the day over Laffan's affair.  Walter Halliburton, the mining engineer, came down to see you, and we were together all the afternoon. He left for London at five."

"And where did I dine?"

"Here.  With Mrs Heaton."

"Don't speak of her as Mrs Heaton!"  I cried in anger.  "She's not my wife, and I will not have her regarded as such."

He gave his shoulders a slight shrug.

"Now, look here, Mr Gedge," I said, speaking for the first time with confidence.  "If you were in my place, awakening suddenly to find that six years of your life had vanished in a single night, and that you were an entirely different person to that of twelve hours ago, what would you believe?"

He looked at me with a somewhat sympathetic expression upon his thin features.

"Well, I don't know what I should think."  Then he added, "But surely such a thing can't be possible."

"It is possible," I cried.  "It has happened to me.  I tell you that last night was six years ago."

He turned from me, as though he considered further argument unavailing.

My head reeled.  What he had told me was utterly incredible.  It seemed absolutely impossible that six whole years should have passed without my knowledge; that I should have entered upon a business of which I had previously known nothing; that I should have rapidly amassed a fortune; and, most of all, that I should have married that powdered and painted woman who had presented herself as my wife.  Yet such were the unaccountable facts which this man Gedge asked me to believe.

He saw that I was extremely dubious about the date, therefore he led me back to the library, where there hung upon the wall a large calendar, which quickly convinced me.

Six; years had really elapsed since yesterday.

In that vexing and perplexing present I reflected upon the puzzling past.  That happy dinner with Mabel at the Boltons, the subsequent discoveries in that drawing-room where she had sat at the piano calmly playing; her soft words of tenderness, and the subsequent treachery of that dog-faced man Hickman, all passed before me with extraordinary vividness.  Yet, in truth, all had happened long ago.

Alas!  I was not like other men.  To the practical, level-headed man of affairs "To-day" may be sufficient, all-engrossing; but to the very large majority--a majority which, I believe, includes also many of the practical, the business of to-day admits of constant pleasant excursions into the golden mists of "long ago," and many happy flights to the rosy heights of "some day."  Most of those who read this strange story of my life will remember with a melancholy affection, with a pain that is more soothing than many pleasures, the house wherein they were born, or at any rate the abode in which they passed the earlier years of their lives.  The agonising griefs of childhood, the disappointments, the soul-racking terrors, mellowed by the gentle touch of passing years, have no sting for our mature sensibilities, but come back to us now with a pathos that is largely tinctured with amusement.

I stood there reviewing the past, puzzled, utterly unable to account for it.  Age, the iconoclast, had shattered most of the airy idols which my youth had set up in honour of itself.  I had lost six of the most precious years of my life--years that I had not lived.

Yet this man before me declared most distinctly that I had lived them; that I had enjoyed a second existence quite apart and distinct from my own self.  Incredible though it seemed, yet it became gradually impressed upon me that what this man Gedge had told me was the actual, hideous truth, and that I had really lived and moved and prospered throughout those six unknown years, while my senses had at the same time remained dormant, and I had thus been utterly unconscious of existence.

But could such a thing be?  As a prosaic man of the world I argued, as any one in his right mind would argue, that such a thing was beyond the bounds of possibility.  Nevertheless, be it how it might, the undisputed fact remained that I had lapsed into unconsciousness on that winter's night six years before, and had known absolutely nothing of my surroundings until I found myself lying upon the floor of the drawing-room of what was alleged to be my country house.

Six years out of a man's life is a large slice.  The face of the world changes considerably in that space of time.  I found myself living a life which was so artificial and incongruous to my own tastes as to appear utterly unreal.  Yet, as I made further inquiry of this man Gedge, every moment that passed showed me plainly that what he had said was the truth.

He related to me the routine of my daily life, and I stood listening agape in wonder.  He told me things of which I had no knowledge; of my own private affairs, and of my business profits; he took big leather-bound ledgers from the great green-painted safe, and showed me formidable sums entered therein, relating, he explained, to the transactions at the office up in London.  Some documents he showed me, large official-looking sheets with stamps and seals and signatures, which he said were concessions obtained from a certain foreign Government, and opened my private letter-book, exhibiting letters I had actually written with my own hand, but without having any knowledge of having done so.

These revelations took away my breath.

It could not be mere loss of memory from which I was suffering.  I had actually lived a second and entirely different life to that I had once led in Essex Street.  Apparently I had become a changed man, had entered business, had amassed a fortune--and had married.

Assuredly, I reflected, I could never have been in my right senses to have married that angular person with the powdered cheeks.  That action, in itself, was sufficient to convince me that my brain had been unbalanced during those six lost years.

Alone, I stood, without a single sympathiser--without a friend.

How this astounding gap in my life had been produced was absolutely beyond explanation.  I tried to account for it, but the reader will readily understand that the problem was, to me, utterly inexplicable. I, the victim of the treachery of that man Hickman, had fallen unconscious one night, and had awakened to discover that six whole years had elapsed, and that I had developed into an entirely different person. It was unaccountable, nay, incredible.

I think I should have grown confidential towards Gedge were it not that he apparently treated me as one whose mind was wandering.  He believed, and perhaps justly so, that my brain had been injured by the accidental blow.  To him, of course, it seemed impossible that I, his master, should know nothing of my own affairs.  The ludicrousness of the situation was to me entirely apparent, yet what could I do to avert it?

By careful questions I endeavoured to obtain from him some facts regarding my past.

"You told me," I said, "that I have many friends.  Among them are there any persons named Anson?"

"Anson?" he repeated reflectively.  "No, I've never heard the name."

"Or Hickman?"

He shook his head.

"I lived once in Essex Street, Strand," I said.  "Have I been to those chambers during the time--the five years you have been in my service?"

Never, to my knowledge.

"Have I ever visited a house in The Boltons, at Kensington?"

"I think not," he responded.

"Curious!  Very curious!"  I observed, thinking deeply of the graceful, dark-eyed Mabel whom I had loved six years before, and who was now lost to me for ever.

"Among my friends is there a man named Doyle?"  I inquired, after a pause.

"Doyle?  Do you mean Mr Richard Doyle, the war correspondent?"

"Certainly," I cried excitedly.  "Is he back?"

"He is one of your friends, and has often visited here," Gedge replied.

"What is his address?  I'll wire to him at once."

"He's in Egypt.  He left London last March, and has not yet returned."

I drew a long breath.  Dick had evidently recovered from fever in India, and was still my best friend, although I had had no knowledge of it.

What, I wondered, had been my actions in those six years of unconsciousness?  Mine were indeed strange thoughts at that moment.  Of all that had been told me I was unable to account for anything.  I stood stunned, confounded, petrified.

For knowledge of what had transpired during those intervening years, or of my own career and actions during that period, I had to rely upon the statements of others.  My mind during all that time had, it appeared, been a perfect blank, incapable of receiving any impression whatsoever.

Nevertheless, when I came to consider how I had in so marvellous a manner established a reputation in the City, and had amassed the sum now lying at my bankers, I reflected that I could not have accomplished that without the exercise of considerable tact and mental capacity.  I must, after all, have retained shrewd senses, but they had evidently been those of my other self--the self who had lived and moved as husband of that woman who called herself Mrs Heaton.

"Tell me," I said, addressing Gedge again, "has my married life been a happy one?"

He looked at me inquiringly.

"Tell me the truth," I urged.  "Don't conceal anything from me, for I intend to get at the bottom of this mystery."

"Well," he said, with considerable hesitation, "scarcely what one might call happy, I think."

"Ah, I understand," I said.  "I know from your tone that you sympathise with me, Gedge."

He nodded without replying.  Strange that I had never known this man until an hour ago, and yet I had grown so confidential with him.  He seemed to be the only person who could present to me the plain truth.

Those six lost years were utterly puzzling.  I was as one returned from the grave to find his world vanished, and all things changed.

I tried to reflect, to see some ray of light through the darkness of that lost period, but to me it seemed utterly non-existent.  Those years, if I had really lived them, had melted away and left not a trace behind.  The events of my life prior to that eventful night when I had dined at The Boltons had no affinity to those of the present.  I had ceased to be my old self, and by some inexplicable transition, mysterious and unheard of, I had, while retaining my name, become an entirely different man.

Six precious years of golden youth had vanished in a single night.  All my ideals, all my love, all my hope, nay, my very personality, had been swept away and effaced for ever.

"Have I often visited Heaton--my own place?"  I inquired, turning suddenly to Gedge.

"Not since your marriage, I believe," he answered.  "You have always entertained some curious dislike towards the place.  I went up there once to transact some business with your agent, and thought it a nice, charming old house."

"Ay, and so it is," I sighed, remembering the youthful days I had spent there long ago.  All the year round was sunshine then, with the most ravishing snow-drifts in winter, and ice that sparkled in the sun so brilliantly that it seemed almost as jolly and frolicsome as the sunniest of sunlit streams, dancing and shimmering over the pebbles all through the cloudless summer.  Did it ever rain in those old days long ago?  Why, yes; and what splendid times I used to have on those occasions--toffee-making in the schoolroom, or watching old Dixon, the gamekeeper, cutting gun-wads in the harness-room.

And I had entertained a marked dislike to the place!  All my tastes and ideas during those blank years had apparently become inverted.  I had lived and enjoyed a world exactly opposite to my own--the world of sordid money-making and the glaring display of riches.  I had, in a word, aped the gentleman.

There was a small circular mirror in the library, and before it I stood, marking every line upon my face, the incredible impress of forgotten years.

"It is amazing, incredible!"  I cried, heart-sick with desire to penetrate the veil of mystery that enshrouded that long period of unconsciousness.  "All that you have told me, Gedge, is absolutely beyond belief.  There must be some mistake.  It is impossible that six years can have passed without my knowledge."

"I think," he said, "that, after all, Britten's advice should be followed.  You are evidently not yourself to-day, and rest will probably restore your mental power to its proper calibre."

"Bah!"  I shouted angrily.  "You still believe I'm mad.  I tell you I'm not.  I'll prove to you that I'm not."

"Well," he remarked, quite calmly, "no sane man could be utterly ignorant of his own life.  It doesn't stand to reason that he could."

"I tell you I'm quite as sane as you are," I cried.  "Yet I've been utterly unconscious these six whole years."

"Nobody will believe you."

"But I swear it to be true," I protested.  "Since the moment when consciousness left me in that house in Chelsea I have been as one dead."

He laughed incredulously.  The slightly confidential tone in which I had spoken had apparently induced him to treat me with indifference.  This aroused my wrath.  I was in no mood to argue whether or not I was responsible for my actions.

"A man surely can't be unconscious, while at the same time he transacts business and lives as gaily as you live," he laughed.

"Then you impute that all I've said is untrue, and is due merely to the fact that I'm a trifle demented, eh?"

"Britten has said that you are suffering from a fit of temporary derangement, and that you will recover after perfect rest."

"Then, by taking me around this house, showing me those books, and explaining all to me, you've merely been humouring me as you would a harmless lunatic!"  I cried furiously.  "You don't believe what I say, that I'm perfectly in my right mind, therefore leave me.  I have no further use for your presence, and prefer to be alone," I added harshly.

"Very well," he answered, rather piqued; "if you wish I'll, of course, go."

"Yes, go; and don't return till I send for you.  Understand that!  I'm in no humour to be fooled, or told that I'm a lunatic."

He shrugged his shoulders, and muttering some words I did not catch, turned and left the library. 