 I MAKE A DISCOVERY.

Reader, I must take you still further into my confidence.  What you have already read is strange, but certain things which subsequently happened to me were even still stranger.

I held that astounding letter in my hand.  My eyes were riveted upon it.

The words written there were puzzling indeed.  A dozen times I read them through, agape with wonder.

The communication, upon the notepaper of the _Bath Hotel_ at Bournemouth, was dated June 4, 1891--five years before--and ran as follows:--

"Dear Mr Heaton,--

"I very much regret that you should have thus misunderstood me.  I thought when we met at Windermere you were quite of my opinion.  You, however, appear to have grown tired after the five months of our engagement, and your love for me has suddenly cooled; therefore our paths in life must in future lie apart.  You have at least told me the truth honestly and straightforwardly.  I, of course, believed that your declarations were true, and that you really loved me truly, but alas! it is evidently not so.  I can only suffer in silence.  Good-bye for ever. We shall never, never meet again.  But I tell you, Wilford, that I bear you no malice, and that my prayers will ever be for your welfare and your happiness.  Perhaps sometimes you will give a passing thought to the sorrowful, heart-broken woman who still loves you.

"Mabel Anson."

What could this mean?  It spoke of our engagement for five months!  I had no knowledge whatever of ever having declared the secret of my love, much less becoming her affianced husband.  Was it possible that in the first few months of my unconscious life I had met her and told her of my affection, of how I worshipped her with all the strength of my being?

As I sat there with the carefully preserved letter in my hand there arose before my eyes a vision of her calm, fair face, bending over the piano, her handsome profile illumined by the candles on either side, the single diamond suspended by its invisible chain, gleaming at her throat like a giant's eye.  The impression I had obtained of her on that night at The Boltons still remained indelibly with me.  Yes, her beauty was superb, her sweetness unsurpassed by that of any other woman I had ever met.

Among the other private papers preserved within the wallet were four scraps of notepaper with typewriting upon them.  All bore the same signature--that of the strange name "Avel."  All of them made appointments.  One asked me to meet the writer in the writing-room of the _Hotel Victoria_ in London, another made an appointment to meet me "on the Promenade at Eastbourne opposite the Wish Tower"; a third suggested my office at Winchester House as a meeting-place, and the fourth gave a rendezvous on the departure platform at King's Cross Station.

I fell to wondering whether I had kept any of these engagements.  The most recent of the letters was dated nearly two years ago.

But the afternoon was wearing on, therefore I placed the puzzling communications in my pocket and ascended to my room in order to rest, and thus carry out the feint of attending to old Britten's directions.

The dressing-bell awakened me, but, confident in the knowledge that I should remain undisturbed, I removed the bandages from my head, bathed the wound, and applied some plaster in the place of the handkerchief. Then, with my hat on, my injury was concealed.

The sun was declining when I managed to slip out of the house unobserved, and set forth down the avenue to Littleham village.  The quaint old place was delightful in the evening calm, but, heedless of everything, I hurried forward down the hill to Withycombe Raleigh, and thence straight across the open country to Lympston station, where I took a third-class ticket for Exeter.  At a wayside station a passenger for London is always remarked, therefore I only booked as far as the junction with the main-line.

At Exeter I found that the up-mail was not due for ten minutes, therefore I telegraphed to London for a room at the _Grand Hotel_, and afterwards bought some newspapers with which to while away the journey.

Sight of newspapers dated six years later than those I had last seen aroused within me a lively curiosity.  How incredible it all seemed as in that dimly lit railway-carriage I sat gathering from those printed pages the history of the lost six years of my life!

The only other occupant of the compartment besides myself was a woman. I had sought an empty carriage, but failing to find one, was compelled to accept her as travelling companion.  She was youngish, perhaps thirty-five, and neatly dressed, but her face, as far as I could distinguish it through her spotted veil, was that of a woman melancholy and bowed down by trouble.  In her dark hair were premature threads of silver, and her deep-sunken eyes, peering forth strangely at me, were the eyes of a woman rendered desperate.

I did not like the look of her.  In travelling one is quick to entertain an instinctive dislike to one's companion, and it was so in my case.  I found myself regretting that I had not entered a smoking-carriage.  But I soon became absorbed in my papers, and forgot her presence.

It was only her voice, a curiously high-pitched one, that made me start.

She inquired if I minded her closing the window because of the draught, and I at once closed it, responding rather frigidly, I believe.

But she was in no humour to allow the conversation to drop and commenced to chat with a familiarity that surprised me.

She noticed how puzzled I became, and at length remarked with a laugh--

"You apparently don't recognise me, Mr Heaton."

"No, madam," I answered, taken aback.  "You have certainly the advantage of me."

This recognition was startling, for was I not flying to London to escape my friends?  This woman, whoever she was, would without doubt recount her meeting with me.

"It is really very droll," she laughed.  "I felt sure from the first, when you entered the compartment, that you didn't know me."

"I certainly don't know you," I responded coldly--

She smiled.  "Ah!  I expect it's my veil," she said.

"But it's really remarkable that you should not recognise Joliot, your wife's maid."

"You!  My wife's maid!"  I gasped, recognising in an instant how cleverly I had been run to earth.

"Yes," she replied.  "Surely you recognise me?" and she raised her veil, displaying a rather unprepossessing face, dark and tragic, as though full of some hidden, sorrow.

I had never seen the woman before in my life, but instantly I resolved to display no surprise and act with caution.

"Ah, of course!"  I said lamely.  "The light here is so bad, you know, that I didn't recognise you.  And where are you going?"

"To London--to the dressmaker's."

"Mrs Heaton has sent you on some commission, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir."

"You joined this train at Exeter, then?"

"I came from Exmouth to Exeter, and changed," she explained.  "I saw you get in at Lympston."  My heart sank within me.  It was evident that this woman had been sent by my self-styled wife to keep watch upon my movements.  If I intended to escape I should be compelled to make terms with her.

Those sharp dark eyes, with a curious light in them--eyes that seemed strangely staring and vacant at times--were fixed upon me, while the smile about her thin lips was clearly one of triumph, as though she had caught me in the act of flying from my home.

I reflected, but next moment resolved to take her into my confidence.  I disliked her, for her manner was somewhat eccentric, and, furthermore, I had only her own word that she was really maid to that angular woman who called herself my wife.  Nevertheless, I could do naught else than make a bargain with her.

"Now," I said at last, after some desultory conversation, "I want to make a suggestion to you.  Do you think that if I gave you a ten-pound note you could forget having met me to-night?  Do you think that you could forget having seen me at all?"

"Forget?  I don't understand."

"Well, to put it plainly, I'm going to London, and I have no desire that anybody should know that I'm there," I explained.  "When I am found to be missing from Denbury, Mrs Heaton will do all in her power to discover me.  You are the only person who knows that I've gone to London, and I want you to hold your tongue."

She smiled again, showing an even row of white teeth.

"I was sent by my mistress to travel by this train and to see where you went," she said bluntly.

"Exactly as I thought," I answered.  "Now, you will accept this as a little present, and return to Denbury to-morrow after a fruitless errand--utterly fruitless, you understand?"

She took the ten sovereigns I handed her, and transferred them to her purse, promising to say nothing of having met me.

I gathered from her subsequent conversation that she had been maid to Mrs Heaton ever since her marriage, and that she had acted as confidential servant.  Many things she mentioned incidentally were of the greatest interest to me, yet they only served to show how utterly ignorant I was of all the past.

"But why did you disclose your identity?"  I inquired, when the lights showed that we were entering the London suburbs.

"Because I felt certain that you didn't recognise me," she laughed; "and I had no wish to spy upon you, knowing as I do that your life is the reverse of happy."

"Then you pity me, eh?"

"I scarcely think that is the word that one of my position ought to use," she answered, with some hesitation.  "Your life has, since your marriage, not been of the happiest, that's certain."

"And so you have no intention of telling any one where I've gone?"  I asked eagerly.

"None in the least, sir.  Rest assured that I shall say nothing--not a single word."

"I thank you," I said, and sat back pondering in silence until the train ran into Waterloo, where we parted, she again reassuring me of her intention to keep my secret.

I congratulated myself upon a very narrow escape, and, taking a cab, drove straight to Trafalgar Square.  As I crossed Waterloo Bridge the long line of lights on the Embankment presented the same picture as they had ever done.  Though six years had passed since I had last had knowledge of London, nothing had apparently changed.  The red night-glare in the leaden sky was still the same; the same unceasing traffic; the same flashing of bright dresses and glittering jewels as hansoms passed and repassed in the Strand--just as I had known London by night during all my life.

The gold-braided porter at the _Grand_ handed me out of the cab, and I ascended by the lift to the room allotted to me like a man in a dream. It hardly seemed possible that I could have been absent in mind from that whirling, fevered world of London for six whole years.  I had given a false name in the reception bureau, fearing that those people who called themselves my friends--Heaven save the mark!--might make inquiries and cause my arrest as a wandering lunatic.  I had no baggage, and I saw that the hotel-clerk looked upon me with some suspicion. Indeed, I threw down a couple of sovereigns, well knowing the rules that no person without luggage was taken unless he paid a deposit beforehand.

I laughed bitterly within myself.  How strange it was!

Next morning I went forth and wandered down the Strand--the dear old Strand that I had once loved so well.  No; it had in no wise changed, except, perhaps, that two or three monster buildings had sprung up, and that the theatres announced pieces quite unknown to me.  A sudden desire seized me to see what kind of place was my own office.  If, however, I went near there, I might, I reflected, be recognised by some one who knew me.  Therefore I turned into a barber's and had my beard cut off, then, further on, bought a new dust coat and another hat.  In that disguise I took a hansom to Old Broad Street.

I was not long in finding the business headquarters of my own self.  How curious it all was!  My name was marked upon a huge brass plate in the entrance-hall of that colossal block of offices, and I ascended to the first floor to find my name inscribed upon the door of one of the largest of the suites.  I stood in the corridor carelessly reading a paper, and while doing so witnessed many persons, several of them smart-looking City men, leave, as though much business was being conducted within.

Fortunately, no one recognised me, and descending, I regained the street.

When outside I glanced up, and there saw my name, in big gilt letters, upon the wire blinds of six big windows.

If I were actually as well known in the City as Gedge had alleged, then it was dangerous for me to remain in that vicinity.  Therefore I entered another cab and drove to my old chambers in Essex Street.

Up the thin-worn creaking stairs of the dismal, smoke-begrimed old place I climbed, but on arrival at my door a plate confronting me showed that Percival and Smale, solicitors, were now the occupants.  From inquiries I made of Mr Smale, it appeared that they had occupied the floor as offices for the past three years, and that the tenants previous to them had been a firm of accountants.  He knew nothing of my tenancy, and could tell me no word of either old Mrs Parker or of Dick Doyle, who had, it appeared, also vacated his quarters long ago.  That afternoon I wandered in the Park, over that same road where I had lingered with Mabel in those cherished days bygone.  Every tree and every object brought back to me sweet memories of her.  But I remembered her letters reposing in my pocket, and bit my lip.  Truly, in the unconscious life when I had been my other self, my real tastes had been inverted.  My love for her had cooled.  I had actually, when engaged to her, cast her aside.

It was incredible.  Surely my experience was unique in all the world.

Unable to decide how to act in those puzzling circumstances, I spent fully a couple of hours in the Park.  The Row was hot, dusty, and almost deserted, but at last I turned into the shady walks in Kensington Gardens, and wandered until I came out into the High Street by that same gate where she had once discovered the dead man's pencil-case in my possession.

As I stood there in the full light of that glaring afternoon, the whole scene came back vividly to me.  She had known that man who had been so foully murdered in her mother's home.  I must, at all costs, find her, clear myself, and elucidate the truth.

Hence, with that object, I hailed another cab, and, giving the man directions to drive to The Boltons, sat back, eager and wondering.

As the conveyance drew up my heart gave a leap for joy, for I saw by the blinds that the house was still occupied.

I sprang out and rang the visitors' bell. 