 EDNA MAKES A PROPOSAL.

"Well," I inquired at last; "and your reason for seeing me this evening?"

She hesitated, as though uncertain in what manner to place her project before me.  She moved uneasily, and, rising, drew forth a large dispatch-box from its leathern case and placed it upon the table.  I noticed that the outer case bore a count's coronet with a cipher beneath.

Having opened the box with a tiny gold master-key which hung upon her bracelet, she drew forth some official-looking papers, and with them returned to her chair.

"You have already been entrusted with a secret, which you have not betrayed--the secret of that unfortunate occurrence on the evening when accident first brought us together," she commenced gravely.  "Therefore I feel convinced that any further confidence placed in you will not be abused."

"I am honoured to think, madam, that you should entertain such an opinion of me," I said, not, however, without the slightest touch of sarcasm.

I did not forget that she had only rescued me from my enemies in return for my silence.  She was not a woman to act without strong motives. Moreover, she had admitted knowledge of that strange midnight crime at The Boltons, and was, therefore, an accessory after the fact.

"You are the Prince's confidential agent here, in London, and I come to you on a mission direct from His Serene Highness."

"From Bulgaria?"  I inquired.

"Yes.  I left Sofia a week ago," she answered.  "It was at first proposed to place the matter in the hands of Guechoff, our diplomatic representative at the Court of St James's, but, on consideration, His Serene Highness, knowing that with the present state of high feeling in the Sobranje a single hint leaking out might prove disastrous, to the dynasty, and perhaps to the nation, resolved to place the matter unreservedly in my hands.  The Prince did me the honour of referring in terms of praise to my previous dealings with you, and instructed me to lose no time in seeing you and invoking your aid."

"In what direction?"  Was it not amazing that I should awake from my years of unconsciousness to find myself so powerful in the world of finance that reigning princes sought my assistance?

"I have here a letter from His Serene Highness;" and she handed me a note which bore the Bulgarian royal arms, and had apparently been written by the Prince's own hand.  It was merely a formal note asking me to consider the secret proposals which would be placed before me by the bearer.

"Well?"  I inquired, when I had read it.  "Explain."

"Briefly," she said, "the facts are as follows: The throne of Bulgaria, never very safe owing to the eternal bickering between St Petersburg and the Porte, is at this moment in imminent danger.  The People's Party in the Sobranje have been defeated, and the police have learnt of a projected popular uprising against His Highness in favour of a republic, the agitation being, of course, caused by paid agents of Russia.  It is an open secret that Russia, at the first sign of an outbreak, would endeavour to annex the country, hence the position of the throne grows each moment more perilous.  Fear of giving offence to Russia prevents orders being issued for the arrest of the secret agitators, and it seems therefore as though a revolution cannot long be delayed.  It is your aid His Serene Highness seeks--your aid to negotiate a loan of half a million sterling."

"Half a million!"  I ejaculated.  "A large sum!  It seems incredible that I should be a dealer in millions."

"A large sum, certainly, but you can easily obtain it," she quickly assured me.  "I have all the necessary preliminaries of the securities here;" and she pointed to the pile of papers at her side.

"I take it that the money is required for the Prince's private purse?"

"No; solely for defence--to purchase arms and ammunition; to pay the army the arrears due, so as to secure their support in case of an outbreak, and to pay certain heavy sums as secret-service money.  All this is imperative in order to save the country from falling into the hands of Russia.  But it must be done, of course, in strictest secrecy, His Highness, as I have already explained, hesitated to entrust the matter to his recognised minister here because the spies of Russia are everywhere, and if any knowledge of his intentions leaked out it would be fatal to his plans."

"And so he trusts me!"  I said, smiling.

"He does, absolutely."

"And where does His Highness think that I am going to get half a million of money from at a moment's notice, pray?"  I asked with a smile.

"With these in your possession there will be no difficulty," she responded coolly, indicating the papers.  "There is not a financial agent in the City of London who would not be only too delighted to, without its intentions being known."

"But you say it is all a secret," I observed.  "How do you think it possible that I can raise such a loan without its intentions being known?"

She laughed outright.

"The money, you will find from the documents here, is ostensibly for the construction of a new railway from Philippopolis, by the Shipka to Rustchuk.  The plans are here, properly prepared, so that you need have no hesitation in showing them to any railway engineer."

I saw that she had been trained in a school of clever diplomacy.

"And you say that security will be given?"

"Certainly.  The proposal is to give the customs receipts.  They would be ample.  Failing that, it is probable that the Princess's jewels, which, as you know, include some of the finest pearls in Europe, might be available.  Of the latter, however, I am not sure."

I remained silent, turning over the papers she had passed across to me. They were mostly in French, and, therefore, easily understood.  The documents related to "the long projected scheme of constructing a railway from Philippopolis to Eski Saghra, thence across the Shipka to Rasgrad, joining the line already in operation between Varna and Rustchuk."  Appended were official declarations from the Bulgarian Minister of Finance, countersigned by the Prince himself.

The documents were certainly very ingeniously contrived so as to conceal the real purpose of the loan.  I remarked this, and my companion, laughing lightly, said--

"Deception, to some extent, is always necessary in delicate diplomacy."

The discovery that the mysterious woman--whose name she had withheld from me--was actually a secret agent of the autonomous Principality created by the Berlin Treaty--that turbulent State mostly notable for the assassination of its Ministers--was entirely unlooked for.  On the night when accident had thrown us together, and she had smoothed my brow with her cool hand, I had believed her to be a young girl who had taken pity upon me in my helplessness; but the revelations she had made during that half-hour showed that there had been some firm purpose underlying it all.

She alone knew the truth of that tragic occurrence at The Boltons, and I saw that in this matter I had to deal with a very clever and ingenious woman.

I had now a double purpose in life--to discover Mabel, and to elucidate the mystery of the crime.  Towards that end I intended to strive, and as I sat with my glance fixed upon those mysterious grey eyes, I endeavoured to form some plan of action.

"Madam," I said gravely, at last, "as you appear not to place sufficient confidence in me to tell me your name, I regret that I can place no confidence in these documents."

"My name!" she laughed.  "Ah, of course; I had quite forgotten.  There is no secret about it;" and from her purse she drew forth a folded, much-worn blue paper, which she handed to me.

It was an English passport, bearing the name of "Lucy Edna Grainger."

"Grainger?"  I repeated.  "Then you are English?"

"Yes, I am legally a British subject, because my father was English.  I was, however, born abroad."

A silence fell between us.  The roar of the traffic in Piccadilly came up from below; the summer night was warm, and the window stood open.  At last I determined upon a bold course.

"Now that we have met," I said, "I wish to ask you one or two questions. First, I am desirous of knowing the whereabouts of Mrs Anson and her daughter."

I was watching her narrowly, and saw her give a distinct start at my mention of the same.  Next instant, however, she recovered herself, and with marvellous tact repeated--

"Anson?  Anson?  I have no acquaintance with any person of that name."

I smiled.

"I think it unnecessary that you should deny this, when the truth is so very plain," I observed sarcastically.  "You will, perhaps, next deny that a young man was foully murdered within that house in The Boltons; that you were present, and that you are aware of the identity of those who committed the crime?"

The pallor of her cheeks showed plainly that I had recalled unwelcome memories.

"The unfortunate affair is all of the past," she said hoarsely.  "Why need we discuss it?"

"In the interests of justice," I answered, with firm determination.

"Have you not agreed to remain silent?  Have you not, as recompense, received back your sight, and become enriched beyond your wildest dreams?  Surely you, at least, should not complain."

"I complain of the manner in which the secret of the crime has been preserved," I said.  "I have determined, however, that it shall remain secret no longer."

"You would inform the police!" she gasped, for the moment unable to conceal her alarm.

"If you have no knowledge of Mrs Anson, then I intend to invoke the aid of Scotland Yard in order to discover her."

My words perplexed her.  That she was acquainted with the Ansons I had no doubt, and I was likewise certain that she would never risk information being given to the police.  More than once in the days long past I had entertained a shrewd suspicion that she herself was the actual murderer of that young unknown man.  I looked at her pale face, and vaguely wondered again whether such were the truth.

The fact that she had secured my silence in return for my life as an outcome of that most ingenious conspiracy had seemed to me proof conclusive of her guilt, and now that we had met in those strange circumstances the idea became impressed upon me more forcibly than ever.

What might be her real position in the secret diplomacy of Bulgaria I knew not.  It was evident that considerable confidence was reposed in her.  She had come to me with a cool demand to raise a loan of half a million sterling, and it was plain from what she had explained that the money was urgently needed for the protection of the State against enemies both internal and external.  My own position was unique.  Had not Gedge shown me those official documents, which gave me concessions in the Principality of Bulgaria, I should have laughed this woman's curious story to scorn as a piece of impossible fiction.  But I had glanced over some of those papers at Denbury, and was satisfied that I had actually had many dealings with that State during the six years of my unconscious but prosperous existence.  There seemed every truth in her statement that to her had been due my success in the City in the first instance.

"And supposing you broke your promise and went to Scotland Yard?" she suggested at length, her eyes still fixed upon me.  "What would you expect to find?"

"To find?"  I echoed.  "I should find traces of the crime within that room."

She nodded.  I had expected my words to have some confusing effect upon her, nevertheless, on the contrary, she remained perfectly calm.  Her self-control was extraordinary.

"And what would it profit you, pray?" she asked.

"I should at least know that I had endeavoured to bring to justice those responsible for the poor fellow's death."

"It would only be an endeavour--a vain one, I assure you."

"You mean that the secret is too well concealed ever to be revealed," I observed quickly.

"Yes," she said; "you have guessed aright."

"And, in other words, you defy me to discover the truth?"

"I have not said so.  The word defy is scarcely one which should be used between us, I think, considering that our interests are to-day mutual-- just as they were on the night of the crime."

"I fail to see that," I answered.  "I have no interest whatever in keeping this terrible secret hidden, for while I do so I am acting the part of accessory."

"But surely you have an interest in preserving your own life?" she urged.

"Then you imply that if I were to lay information at Scotland Yard I should be in peril of my life?"  I asked, looking straight into those calm eyes that ever and anon seemed full of mystery.

"Of that I cannot speak with any degree of certainty," she responded. "I would only warn you that in this matter continued silence is by far the best."

"But you have uttered a veiled threat!"  I cried.  "You are aware of the whole facts, and yet refuse to impart to me the simple information of the whereabouts of Mrs Anson.  Do you think it possible in such a case that I can entertain any confidence in you, or in your extraordinary story regarding the affairs of Bulgaria and its Prince?"

"I am unable to give you any information regarding the lady you mention," she replied, with a slight frown of annoyance.

"But you are acquainted with her?"

"I may be--what then?"

"I demand to know where she is."

"And in reply I tell you that I am in ignorance."

"In that case," I said angrily, "I refuse to have any further dealings whatsoever with you.  From the first I became drawn into a trap by you, bound down and for six years held silent by your threats.  But, madam, I now tell you plainly of my intentions.  I mean to-morrow to lay the whole facts before the Director of Criminal Investigations, including this story of yours regarding the Prince and his people."

She rose slowly from her chair, perfectly calm, her dignity unruffled. Her manner was absolutely perfect.  Had she been a princess herself she could not have treated my sudden ebullition of anger with greater disdain.

She gathered up the papers she had put before me, and, replacing them in the dispatch-box, locked it with the golden master-key upon her bangle.

Afterwards, she turned to me and said, in a hard distinct voice--

"Then I understand that I have to inform His Serene Highness that you refuse to assist him further?"

"Tell him whatever you choose, madam," I answered, rising and taking up my hat and cane.  "I shall, in future, act according to my own inclinations."

"And at your own risk!" she added, in a harsh voice, as, bowing stiffly before her, I turned towards the door.

"Yes, madam," I answered; "I accept your challenge--at my own risk." 