 THE HOUSE WITH THE PORTICO.

The weight of the inert body oppressed me, and in striving to extricate myself it slipped from the couch and slid to the ground; but such a feeling of dread overcame me that I reached down and pushed the warm body under the couch.

The faint sound of some one moving stealthily across the thick pile carpet caused me to lie rigid, holding my breath.  I heard the movement distinctly, and curiously enough it sounded as though it were a woman, for there was just a faint rustling as though her skirts trailed upon the ground.  My quick ear told me that the person was approaching.  By the panting breath I knew that it was the assassin.  Was I, too, to fall a victim?

I tried to call out, but in that moment of agony and horror my tongue refused to articulate.  It seemed to cleave to the roof of my mouth.

The sound of movement ceased, and I knew that the person was quite close to me.  My eyes were wide open, held fixed in expectant horror.

I felt a warm breath upon my cheeks, and knew that the unknown assassin was peering into my eyes.  In a few moments I had an instinctive feeling of something being held a few inches from my face.

Then the words that had been spoken by my protectress recurred to me. She had declared to her companions that I was blind, and urged them to test me by holding something to my head.

This was now being done.  The truth of my statement was being proved, possibly by a revolver being held to my brow.  If so, my only chance of safety rested in unflinching coolness.  My position was certainly a most unenviable one.

For a few moments the panting heart of the assassin thumped close to me; then, apparently satisfied, the unknown person moved off in silence without uttering a single word.

My first impulse was to jump up and arrest the progress of the assassin, but on reflection I saw that to do so would only be to invite death. What could I do, blind as I was?

Only could I sit and listen, trying to distinguish every detail of the mystery.

Yes, I became convinced more than ever that the person leaving the room was not a man--but a woman.

Could it be the same individual whose cool, sympathetic hand had only a quarter of an hour before soothed my brow?  The thought held me dumbfounded.

I had all along believed that the assassin had been a man, but it was certain by that swish of silken flounces that it was a woman.

As I listened I heard the click of an electric-light switch at the door of the room, and a couple of minutes later a heavy door closed.  From the bang of the knocker I knew that the street door had been shut by some person who had left the house.

I still sat listening.  All was silent.  Only the low ticking of the clock broke the dead stillness of the night.  The mysterious woman who had thus made her exit had evidently switched off the light, leaving me in total darkness with the hideous evidences of her crime.

For some short time longer I listened, my ears open to catch every sound, but, hearing nothing, I now knew that I was alone.  Therefore, rising to my feet, I groped about until my hands touched the prostrate body of the man, and as I did so he heaved a long sigh, and a quick shudder ran through his frame.  The wound had evidently not caused instant death, but, placing my hand quickly over the heart, I found that it had now ceased its beating with the final spasm.

Slowly, and with utmost care, I passed both my hands over the dead man's face, in order to obtain some mental picture of his appearance.  His hair seemed thick and well parted at the side, his features those of a young man shaven save for the moustache, which was long and well trained.  He was in evening clothes, and wore in his shirt a single stud, which, to my touch, seemed of very peculiar shape.  I tried to make out its design, but in vain, when suddenly I remembered that if I took it, it might afterwards give me some clue to its dead owner's identity.  So I took it from the stiff shirt-front and placed it in the pocket of my vest.

His watch-chain was an ordinary curb, I found, with a watch which had the greasy feel of silver.  In his pockets were a couple of sovereigns and some loose silver, but no letters nor card-case, nothing indeed to lead me to a knowledge of who he really was.  In one pocket I found a small pencil-case, and this I also took for my own purposes.

Half a dozen times I placed my hand upon his heart, whence the blood was slowly oozing, but there was no movement.

My investigations showed that he was about twenty-eight years of age; probably fair, by the softness of the hair and moustache, with even teeth, rather sharp jawbones and cheeks a trifle thin.  Having ascertained this much, I groped forward with both hands in the direction of the room wherein the woman had been so swiftly done to death.  It was in darkness, I have no doubt, but to me darkness was of no account, for I was ever in eternal gloom.  The furniture over which I stumbled here and there was covered with silk brocade, the woodwork being of that smoothness which had led me to believe that it must be gilded.  It was without doubt a fine spacious drawing-room where I had been lying, for the dimensions of the place were quite unusual, and the objects with which my hands came into contact were always of a character magnificent, and in keeping with the grandeur of the place.  The house was evidently one of those fine mansions with which the West End of London abounds, and certainly this apartment, even though I could not see it, was the acme of comfort and luxury.

I at last found the entrance to the adjoining room, but the door was locked.

This sudden check to my investigations caused me to pause.  That a woman had been first struck down by a cowardly blow appeared evident.  The loud agonised shriek which had emanated from that inner room was, I felt convinced, that of the tender, sweet-voiced woman who had administered to my wants.  It seemed, now that I recollected, as though she had been seated at the piano when the fatal blow was dealt.  The scream and the cessation of the music had occurred simultaneously.

The theory impressed itself upon me that a woman was responsible for both crimes.  It was a woman who had stood panting near me, who had noiselessly tested me to ascertain whether I could distinguish objects about me, and who had afterwards left the house.  My blindness had, no doubt, saved my life.

Before leaving she had, for some unknown reason, locked the communicating door and taken the key.  But upon the air, after she had gone, there lingered the subtle fragrance of _peau d'Espagne_, the same perfume used by the woman whose cool palm had soothed my brow. Nevertheless, it seemed impossible that a woman could thus commit a double crime so swiftly and with such force as to drive a knife to the heart of a man and fling him back upon me--all in silence, without the utterance of one single word.

With my eyes only a void of blackness, this mystery was bewildering, and rendered the more tantalising by my inability to gaze about me.  I had been present at the enactment of a terrible drama, but had not witnessed it, and could not, therefore, recognise either culprit or victims.

Again I searched the great handsome room, in order to rivet all its details upon my memory.  It had three long windows opening down to the floor, which showed that it was situated in the back of the house, otherwise they must have opened upon the street.  In one corner was a pedestal, whereon stood a marble bust of a dancing-woman, like those I had seen in the sculptor's at Pisa before the days of my darkness. There were tables, too, with glass tops wherein, I supposed, were curios and bric-a-brac, and before the great fireplace was stretched a tiger-skin, with the paws preserved.

While groping there, however, my hand came into contact with something which I found was a narrow, three-edged knife, so sharp that I cut my finger while feeling it.  It had a cross-hilt, and the blade was thin and triangular, tapering to a point.  The shape I knew to be Italian, one of those Florentine stilettos used long ago in the Middle Ages, a wound from which was almost certain to be fatal.  The Italians have long ago brought the use of the knife to a fine art, and even to-day, murders by stabbing are the most usual occurrences reported in their newspapers. The blade of this antique weapon was about nine inches long, and the handle velvet-covered and bound with wire, probably either gold or silver.  The point was sharp as a needle.

My first impulse was to take possession of it; but, on reflection, I saw that if I did so grave suspicion might possibly fall upon me.  I might even be charged with the murder, especially as I had already in my pocket the dead's man stud and pencil-case.  This thought caused me to throw down the stiletto, and, continuing my search, I at length found the door which gave egress to the place.

I opened it and stood in the hall to listen.  There was no sound.  The stillness of the night remained quite unbroken, and I believed myself alone with the dead.  By coughing, the echo of my voice showed that the hall and staircase were wide and spacious.  Then it struck me that I had no stick, without which I feared to walk; but, groping about, I found an umbrella stand, and took therefrom a stout thorn, the handle of which seemed smooth-worn by long usage.

What was my best course?  Should I go forth secretly, return home and await the discovery of the terrible affair, which would no doubt be fully reported in those evening newspapers which revel in crime?  Or should I go out and inform the first constable I met?  The latter, I saw, was my duty, and even though I had no desire to mix myself up in such a mysterious and sensational affair, I resolved to go at once and state all that I heard.

Whether the street door was situated to right or left I knew not, but trying the right first, I found that the door was at the end of the hall.  Opening it, I passed out, and having closed it again noiselessly went down the five wide steps into the deserted street.

There were iron railings in front of the house, and before the door was a big stone portico.  My hands told me both these details.

I turned to the left, and after walking some little distance crossed a road and kept on down a long road which, although it did not appear to be a main thoroughfare, seemed to run straight as an arrow.  For fully a quarter of an hour I walked on without meeting a soul.  The only noise that broke the quiet was the dismal howl of a dog, and now and then the distant shriek and low roar of trains.  Suddenly I found myself in quite a labyrinth of crooked streets, and after several turns emerged into what I presumed to be one of the great arteries of London.

I stood listening.  The air was fresh, and it seemed to me that dawn was spreading.  Afar I could hear the measured, heavy tread of a police-constable, and hurried in his direction.  As I did so I put out my stick and it struck some iron railings.  A few minutes later, in hot haste, I overtook the man of heavy tread, and addressing him, said--

"Tell me, please, are you a constable?"

"Well, I believe I am," answered a rough voice, pleasantly withal.  "But can't you see?"

"No, unfortunately I can't," I replied.  "Where am I?"

"Outside the South Kensington Museum.  Where do you want to go?"

"I want you to come with me," I said.

"With you.  What's up?"

"I've been present at a terrible tragedy," I blurted forth.  "Two people have been murdered."

"Two people?" exclaimed the voice, quickly interested.  "Where?"

"In--in a house," I faltered, for not until that instant did the appalling truth occur to me.  I had wandered away from the place, and had no idea of its outward appearance, or in what road it was situated!

"Well, double murders don't often take place in the street, sonny. But--" and the voice hesitated.

"Why, there's blood on your clothes, I see!  Tell me all about it. Where's the house?"

"I confess that I've been foolishly stupid, for I've left it, and I could never find my way back again.  I'm blind, you see, and I've no idea of its exterior appearance."

"At any rate you've been near enough to the affair to get yourself in a pretty mess," the rough voice said, somewhat suspiciously.  "Surely you have some idea of where the affair took place?"

The situation was certainly the most curious in which any man could be placed, for with only one thought in my mind, namely, to raise the alarm, I had gone forth from the house of mystery and failed to mark it. This negligence of mine might, I reflected, result in the affair being hushed up for ever.  London is a big place in which to search for the scene of a murder upon which my eyes had never gazed, and the details of which I only knew by my sense of touch.  How many thousands of houses there were in the West End each with its smoke-blackened portico and little piece of area railing.

"No," I responded to the officer's inquiry.  "I was so bent upon giving information that I forgot to place any mark upon the house by which to know it again."

"Well, I've 'eard a good many funny stories while I've been on night-duty in these eighteen years, but your yarn is about the rummest of the lot," he said bluntly.

"I only know that the house is a large one, very well furnished, and has a portico and railings in front--a double house, with hall in the centre, and rooms on either side."

"That don't 'elp us very much, sonny," the voice observed.  "What's the good o' running after me with a yarn like this if you can't take me to the spot?  To judge from the state of your clothes, though, you've been in some scrap or another.  If your coat was not covered with blood as it is, I'd be inclined to put you down as a chap with a screw loose."

"I'm not demented, I tell you," I cried warmly.  "There's a terrible crime been committed, and I have sought your assistance."

"And I'd go and have a look at the premises with you, if you could only tell me where they are.  But as you can't--well, what are we to do, sonny?" 