“Want a job, Average?”

Bertram, his elegance undimmed by the first really trying weather of the early summer, drifted to the coolest spot in the Ad-Visor’s sanctum and spread his languid length along a wicker settee.

“Give a man breathing space, can’t you?” returned Average Jones. “This is hotter than Baja California.”

“Why, I assumed that your quest of the quack’s scion would have trained you down fit for anything.”

“Haven’t even caught up with the clippings that Simpson floods me with, since I came back,” confessed the other. “What have you got up your faultlessly creased sleeve? It’s got to be something different to rouse me from a well-earned lethargy.”

“Because a man buncoes a loving father out of five thousand dollars,” Average Jones snorted gently, “is no reason why he should unanimously elect himself a life member of the Sons of Idleness,” murmured Bertram.

He cast an eye around the uniquely decorated walls, upon which hung, here, the shrieking prospectus of a mythical gold-mine; there a small but venomous political placard, and on all sides examples of the uncouth or unusual in paid print; exploitations of grotesque quackeries; appeals, business-like, absurd, or even passionate, in the form of “Wants;” threats thinly disguised as “Personals;” dim suggestions of crime, of fraud, of hope, of tragedy, of mania, all decorated with the stars of “paid matter” or designated by the _Adv_. sign, and each representing some case brought to A. Jones, Ad-Visor—to quote his hybrid and expressive doorplate—by some one of his numerous and incongruous clients.

“Something different?” repeated the visitor, reverting to Average Jones’ last observation. “Well, yes; I think so. Where is Bellair Street?”

“Ask a directory. How should I know?” retorted the other lazily. “Sounds like old Greenwich Village.”

Bertram reached over with a cane of some pale, translucent green wood, selected to match his pale green tie and the marvelous green opal which held it in place, and prodded his friend severely in the ribs. “Double-up Lucy; the sun is in the sky!” he proclaimed with unwonted energy. “Listen. I cut this out of yesterday’s _Evening Register_. With my own fair hands I did it, to rouse you from your shameless sloth. With your kind attention, ladies and gentlemen—” He read:

“WANTED—A young man, unattached, competent to act as assistant in outdoor scientific work. Manual skill as desirable as experience. Emolument for one month’s work generous. Man without family insisted upon. Apply after 8:30 P. M. in proper person. Smith, 74 Bellair Street.”


Slowly whirling in his chair, Average Jones held out a hand, received the clipping, read it through with attention, laid it on the desk, and yawned.

“Is that all?” said the indignant Bertram. “Do you notice that ‘unattached’ in the opening sentence? And the specification that the applicant must be without family? Doesn’t that inspire any notion above a yawn in your palsied processes of mind?”

“It does; several notions. I yawned,” explained Average Jones with dignity, “because I perceive with pain that I shall have to go to work. What do you make of the thing, yourself?”

“Well, this man Smith—”

“What man Smith?”

“Smith, of 74 Bellair Street, who signs the ad.”

Average Jones laughed, “There isn’t any Smith,” he said.

“What do you know about it?” demanded Bertram, sitting up.

“Only what the advertisement tells me. It was written by a foreigner; that’s too obvious for argument. ‘Emolument generous.’ ‘Apply in proper person.’ Did a Smith ever write that? No. A Borgrevsky might have, or a Greiffenhauser, or even a Mavronovoupoulos. But never Smith.”

“Well, it’s nothing to me what his name is. Only I thought you might be the aspiring young scientist he was yearning for.”

“Wouldn’t wonder if I were, thank you. Let’s see. Bellair Street? Where’s the directory? Thanks. Yes, it is Greenwich Village. Well, I think I’ll just stroll down that way and have a look after dinner.”

Thus it was that Mr. Adrian Van Reypen Egerton Jones found himself on a hot May evening pursuing the Adventure of Life into the vestibule of a rather dingy old house which had once been the abode of solemn prosperity if not actual aristocracy in the olden days of New York City. Almost immediately the telegraphic click of the lock apprised him that he might enter, and as he stepped into the hallway the door of the right-hand ground-floor apartment opened to him.

“You will please come in,” said a voice.

The tone was gentle and measured. Also it was, by its accent, alien to any rightful Smith. The visitor stepped into a passageway which was dim until he entered it and the door swung behind him. Then it became pitch black.

“You will pardon this,” said the voice. “A severe affection of the eyes compels me.”

“You are Mr. Smith?” asked Average Jones.

“Yes. Your hand if you please.”

The visitor, groping, brushed with his fingers the back of a hand which felt strangely hot and pulpy. Immediately the hand turned and closed, and he was led forward to an inner room and seated in a chair. The gentle, hot clasp relaxed and left his wrist free. A door facing him, if his ears could be trusted, opened and shut.

“You will find matches at your elbow,” said the voice, coming dulled, from a further apartment. “Doubtless you would be more comfortable with a light.”

“Thank you,” returned Average Jones, enormously entertained by the dime-novel setting which his host had provided for him.

He lighted the gas and looked about a sparsely furnished room without a single distinguishing feature, unless a high and odd-shaped traveling-bag which stood on a chair near by could be so regarded. The voice interrupted his survey.

“You have come in answer to my advertisement?”

“Yes, sir.”

“You are, then, of scientific pursuit?”

“Of scientific ambition, at least. I hope to meet your requirements.”

“Your name, if you please.”

“Jones; A. Jones, of New York City.”

“You live with your family?”

“I have no family or near relatives.”

“That is well. I will not conceal from, you that there are risks. But the pay is high. Can you endure exposure? Laboring in all weathers? Subsisting on rough fare and sleeping as you may?”

“I have camped in the northern forests.”

“Yes,” mused the voice. “You look hardy.”

Average Jones arose. “You—er—are spying upon me, then,” he drawled quietly. “I might have—er—suspected a peep-hole.”

He advanced slowly toward the door whence the voice came. A chair blocked his way. Without lowering his gaze he shoved at the obstacle with his foot.

“Have a care!” warned the voice.

The chair toppled and overturned. From it fell, with a light shock, the strange valise, which, striking the floor, flew open, disclosing a small cardboard cabinet. Across the front of the cabinet was a strip of white paper labeled in handwriting, each letter being individual, with what looked to the young man like the word “MERCY.” He stooped to replace the bag.

“Do not touch it,” ordered the voice peremptorily.

Average Jones straightened up to face the door again.

“I will apologize for my clumsiness,” he said slowly, “when you explain why you have tried to trick me.”

There was a pause. Then:

“Presently,” said the voice. “Meantime, after what you have accidentally seen, you will perhaps appreciate that the employment is not without its peril!”

Average Jones stared from the door to the floored cabinet and back again in stupefaction.

“Perhaps I’m stupid,” he said, “but a misshapen valise containing a cabinet with a girl’s name on it doesn’t seem calculated to scare an able-bodied man to death. It isn’t full of dynamite, is it?”

“What is your branch of scientific work?” counter-questioned the other.

“Botany,” replied the young man, at random.

“No other? Physics? Entomology? Astronomy? Chemistry? Biology?”

The applicant shook his head in repeated negation. “None that I’ve specialized on.”

“Ah! I fear you will not suit my purpose.”

“All right. But you haven’t explained, yet, why you’ve been studying me through a peep-hole, when I am not allowed to see you.”

After a pause of consideration the voice spoke again.

“You are right. Since I can not employ you, I owe you every courtesy for having put you to this trouble. You will observe that I am not very presentable.”

The side door swung open. In the dimness of the half-disclosed apartment Average Jones saw a man huddled in a chair. He wore a black skull cap. So far as identification went he was safe. His whole face was grotesquely blotched and swollen. So, also, were the hands which rested on his knees.

“You will pardon me,” said Average Jones, “but I am by nature cautious. You have touched me. Is it contagious?”

A contortion of the features, probably indicating a smile, made the changeling face more hideous than before.

“Be at peace,” he said. “It is not. You can find your way out? I bid you good evening, sir.”

“Now I wonder,” mused Average Jones, as he jolted on the rear platform of an Eighth Avenue car, “by what lead I could have landed that job. I rather think I’ve missed something.”

All that night, and recurrently on many nights thereafter, the poisoned and contorted face and the scrawled “MERCY” on the cabinet lurked troublously in his mind. Nor did Bertram cease to scoff him for his maladroitness until both of them temporarily forgot the strange “Smith” and his advertisement in the entrancement of a chase which led them for a time far back through the centuries to a climax that might well have cost Average Jones his life. They had returned from Baltimore and the society of the Man who spoke Latin a few days when Bertram, at the club, called up Average Jones’ office.

“I’m sending Professor Paul Gehren to you,” was his message. “He’ll call to-day or to-morrow.”

Average Jones knew Professor Gehren by sight, knew of him further by repute as an impulsive, violent, warm-hearted and learned pundit who, for a typically meager recompense, furnished sundry classes of young gentlemen with amusement, alarm and instruction, in about equal parts, through the medium of lectures at the Metropolitan University. During vacations the professor pursued, with some degree of passion, experiments which added luster and selected portions of the alphabet to his name. Twice a week he walked down-town to the Cosmic Club, where he was wont to dine and express destructive and anarchistic views upon the nature, conduct, motives and personality of the organization’s governing committees.

On the day following Bertram’s telephone, Professor Gehren entered Astor Court Temple, took the elevator to the ninth floor, and, following directions, found himself scanning a ground-glass window flaunting the capitalized and gilded legend,

A. JONES, AD-VISOR


“Ad-Visor,” commented the professor, rancorously. “A vicious verbal monstrosity!” He read on:

ADVICE UPON ADVERTISING IN ALL FORMS _Consultation Free. Step In_


“Consultation free!” repeated the educator with virulence. “A trap! A manifest pitfall! I don’t know why Mr. Bertram should have sent me hither. The enterprise is patently quack,” he asseverated in a rising voice.

Upon the word a young man opened the door and, emerging, received the accusation full in the face. The young man smiled.

“Quack, I said,” repeated the exasperated mentor, “and I repeat it. Quack!”

“If you’re suffering from the delusion that you’re a duck,” observed the young man mildly, “you’ll find a taxidermist on the top floor.”

The caller turned purple. “If you are Mr. Jones, of the Cosmic Club—”

“I am.”

“—there are certain things which Mr. Bertram must explain.”

“Yes; Bertram said that you were coming, but I’d almost given you up. Come in.”

“Into a—a den where free advice is offered? Of all the patent and infernal rascalities, sir, the offer of free advice—”

“There, there,” soothed the younger man. “I know all about the free swindles. This isn’t one of them. It’s just a fad of mine.”

He led the perturbed scholar inside and got him settled in a chair. “Now, go ahead. Show me the advertisement and tell me how much you lost.”

“I’ve lost my assistant. There is no advertisement about it. What I came for is advice. But upon seeing your tricky door-plate—”

“Oh, that’s merely to encourage the timorous. Who is this assistant?”

“Harvey Craig, a youth, hardly more than a boy, for whom I feel a certain responsibility, as his deceased parents left him in my care.”

“Yes,” said Jones as the professor paused.

“He has disappeared.”

“When?”

“Permanently, since ten days ago.”

“Permanently?”

“Up to that time he had absented himself without reporting to me for only three or four days at a time.”

“He lived with you?”

“No. He had been aiding me in certain investigations at my laboratory.”

“In what line?”

“Metallurgy.”

“When did he stop?”

“About four weeks ago.”

“Did he give any reason?”

“He requested indefinite leave. Work had been offered him, he hinted, at a very high rate of remuneration.”

“You don’t know by whom?”

“No, I know nothing whatever about it.”

“Have you any definite suspicions as to his absence?”

“I gravely fear that the boy has made away with himself.”

“Why so?”

“After his first absence I called to see him at his room. He had obviously undergone a violent paroxysm of grief or shame.”

“He told you this?”

“No. But his eyes, and, indeed, his whole face, were abnormally swollen, as with weeping.”

“Ah, yes.” Average Jones’ voice had suddenly taken on a bored indifference. “Were—er—his hands, also?”

“His hands? Why should they?”

“Of course, why, indeed? You noted them?”

“I did not, sir.”

“Did he seem depressed or morose?”

“I can not say that he did.”

“Professor Gehren, what, newspaper do you take?”

The scholar stared. “The _Citizen_ in the morning, The _Register_ in the evening.”

“Are either of them delivered to your laboratory?”

“Yes; the _Register_.”

“Do you keep it on file?”

“No.”

“Ah! That’s a pity. Then you wouldn’t know if one were missing?”

The professor reflected. “Yes, there was a copy containing a letter upon Von Studeborg’s recent experiments—”

“Can you recall the date?”

“After the middle of June, I think.”

Average Jones sent for a file and handed it to Professor Gehren.

“Is this it?” he asked, indicating the copy of June 18.

“That is the letter!” said that gentleman.

Average Jones turned the paper and found, upon an inside page, the strange advertisement from 74 Bellair Street.

“One more question, Professor,” said he. “When did you last see Mr. Craig?”

“Nine or ten days ago. I think it was July 2.”

“How did he impress you?”

“As being somewhat preoccupied. Otherwise normal.”

“Was his face swollen then?”

“No.”

“Where did you see him?”

“The first time at my laboratory, about eleven o’clock.”

“You saw him again that day, then?”

“Yes. We met by accident at a little before two P.M. on Twenty-third Street. I was surprised, because he had told me he had to catch a noon train and return to his work.”

“Then he hadn’t done so?”

“Yes. He explained that he had, but that he had been sent back to buy some supplies.”

“You believe he was telling the truth?”

“In an extensive experience with young men I have never known a more truthful one than he.”

“Between the first day of his coming back to New York and the last, had you seen him?”

“I had talked with him over the telephone. He called up two or three times to say that he was well and working hard and that he hoped to be back in a few weeks.”

“Where did he call up from?”

“As he did not volunteer the information, I am unable to say.”

“Unfortunate again. Well, I think you may drop the notion of suicide. If anything of importance occurs, please notify me at once. Otherwise, I’ll send you word when I have made progress.”

Having dismissed the anxious pundit, Average Jones, so immersed in thought as to be oblivious to outer things, made his way to the Cosmic Club in a series of caroms from indignant pedestrian to indignant pedestrian. There, as he had foreseen, he found Robert Bertram.

“Can I detach you from your usual bridge game this evening?” he demanded of that languid gentleman.

“Very possibly. What’s the inducement?”