CHAPTER XV.

A PLOT AGAINST CHESTER.


The more the bookkeeper thought of it, the more he was of the opinion that Chester must have had something to do with the events that led to his discovery and humiliation. Otherwise, how could James Long have recovered the receipt? He, himself, had found it and kept it in his possession. Chester must have chanced upon the receipt and carried it to Long.

Though well convinced of it, he wished to find out positively. Accordingly, he took his cousin Felix into his confidence as far as was necessary, and sent him to the room of the mechanic to find out whether Chester had been there.

It was the middle of the forenoon when Felix knocked at the door of James Long’s humble home.

Mrs. Long, with the baby in her arms, answered the knock.

“Is this Mrs. Long?” asked Felix.

“Yes, sir.”

“I am the friend of Chester Rand.”

“I don’t think I know Mr. Rand,” said Mrs. Long, who had not heard Chester’s name.

“The boy from Mr. Fairchild’s office. He called here, I believe, one day last week.”

“Oh, yes and a good friend he was to me and mine.”

“In what way?” asked Felix, his face lighting with satisfaction at the discovery he had made.

“He brought my husband the receipt he had lost. Didn’t he tell you?”

“Oh, yes. I wasn’t thinking of that. He asked me to inquire if he left his gloves here?”

“I haven’t found any. I should have seen them if he left them here.”

“All right. I will tell him. He thought he might have left them. Good morning, ma’am.”

And Felix hurried downstairs. He was not partial to poor people or tenement houses, and he was glad to get away.

He reached the office in time to go out to lunch with the bookkeeper.

“Well?” asked Mullins, eagerly. “Did you go to Long’s?”

“Yes.”

“What did you find out?”

“I found out that your office boy had been there and carried them the receipt.”

“The young—viper! So he is trying to undermine me in the office. Well, he’ll live to regret it,” and the bookkeeper shook his head vigorously.

“I’d get even with him if I were you, Cousin David.”

“Trust me for that! I generally pay off all debts of that kind.”

“How will you do it?” asked Felix, curiously.

“I don’t know yet. Probably I’ll get him into some bad scrape that will secure his discharge.”

“And then you’ll get me into the place?”

“I am afraid I can’t. I am not on good terms with Mr. Fairchild, and my recommendation won’t do you much good, even if I do manage to get rid of Chester.”

“Then I don’t see how I am going to be benefited by working for you,” said Felix, dissatisfied.

“I’ll pay you in some way. To begin with, here’s a dollar. This is for your errand of this morning.”

“Thank you, Cousin David,” said Felix, pocketing the bill with an air of satisfaction. “I think I’ll go to Daly’s Theater to-night. Father doesn’t give me much spending money—only twenty-five cents a week, and what’s a fellow to do with such a beggarly sum as that?”

“It is more than I had at your age.”

“The world has progressed since then. A boy needs more pocket money now than he did fifteen years ago. How soon shall you try to get even with that boy?”

“I think it will be prudent to wait a while. Mr. Fairchild may suspect something if I move too soon. The boy has been with us less than a week.”

“He has been with you long enough to do some harm.”

“That’s true,” said Mullins, with an ugly look.

“Does he seem to suit Mr. Fairchild?”

“Yes; he appears to be intelligent, and he attends to his duties—worse luck!—but he’s a thorn in my side, a thorn in my side! I’d give twenty-five dollars if he was out of the office.”

“Do you want me to break off acquaintance with him?”

“No; keep on good terms with him. Let him think you are his intimate friend. It will give me a chance to plot against him—through you.”