JUST A LITTLE JOKE


There was a great flurry in the farmyard. Old dog Spot was yelping; Henrietta Hen was clucking; Turkey Proudfoot was gobbling; Grunty Pig was squealing.

“For pity’s sake! What has happened?” Miss Kitty Cat asked the old horse Ebenezer, who stood tied to a hitching-post near the woodshed steps.

Ebenezer switched his tail at a fly on his flank before he spoke.

“Didn’t you see what Farmer Green led into the barn a few minutes ago?” he inquired.

“No! What was it?” Miss Kitty answered eagerly.

The old horse Ebenezer yawned, as if there was something that made him very, very weary.

“It was a most peculiar person,” he told Miss Kitty Cat. “I made myself known to him; and asked him his name. He said it was ‘Mistah Mule.’ And then what do you think he did?”

Miss Kitty couldn’t guess.

“He tried to kick me,” said old Ebenezer in a tone of great disgust.

“Is he going to live here? Or is he only a guest?” Miss Kitty Cat wanted to know.

“He’s here to stay until Farmer Green gets tired of him,” Ebenezer explained. “The worst of it is, he’s going to have a stall right next to mine. I know already that I shall not enjoy having him as a next-door neighbor.”

All at once there was a great commotion in the barn. First came a thumping, pounding noise. Then Farmer Green’s voice rose above the racket. And next followed an odd sound, “Hee-haw! Hee-haw!”

“What’s that?” Miss Kitty Cat cried.

“It’s Mistah Mule,” Ebenezer told her. “He’s laughing. I wonder what the joke is.”

At that moment old dog Spot came scurrying out of the barn. He had his tail tucked between his legs; and his face wore a frightened look.

“What’s the joke?” the horse Ebenezer called to him.

“Mistah Mule just kicked Farmer Green,” Spot yelped. “And then Mistah Mule laughed. Didn’t you hear him?”

Ebenezer nodded.

“Did Farmer Green laugh at the joke too?” asked Miss Kitty Cat.

“He did not,” old Spot howled. “He was so angry that he scared me; though goodness knows I had nothing to do with the affair. I was merely an onlooker.”

“Are you sure you didn’t nip at Mistah Mule’s heels?” the horse inquired.

“Not I!” Spot assured him. “A good many years ago I went too near a Mule’s heels down at the village. And I’ve never forgotten what happened.”