GOING FOR A DRIVE


Everybody on the farm agreed that Mistah Mule was growing better natured. Even Farmer Green had to admit that Mistah Mule’s behavior had improved.

One day Johnnie Green’s father wished to send his son to the village, on an errand.

“I’m going to let you drive the mule,” he told Johnnie. “We’ll hitch him to the light wagon. Here’s a letter to the store-keeper. He’ll give you a part for the mowing-machine. Hurry right back with it.”

A few minutes later Mistah Mule trotted briskly out of the yard, with Johnnie Green sitting very straight on the wagon-seat.

Now, in spite of his long ears and his odd tail, Mistah Mule had a certain style about him. For all he was lazy, when he chose to behave himself he moved his small, narrow feet in a smart way. And when he trotted he raised his knees quite high, in a fashionable manner. Moreover, he had a sleek black coat, which glistened in the sunshine.

Johnnie Green couldn’t help feeling rather proud as Mistah Mule went down the road at a spanking trot.

“We’ll be back home long before Father expects us,” he thought.

Soon Mistah Mule’s feet were thumping over the great covered bridge that crossed the river. And in a short time they began to climb the long hill that rose from the valley. Beyond this hill lay the village.

Mistah Mule fell into a walk. A slow walk it was. The sun, beating down upon Johnnie Green’s back, felt scorching hot. It beat down upon Mistah Mule’s back, too. And he began to think that it would be foolish to climb that mile-long hill ahead of him, dragging the wagon and Johnnie Green behind him. His head drooped. His ears flopped back and forth with every step. And at last he moved so slowly that Johnnie Green spoke to him.

“Get along, there!” he cried, drawing the reins tighter.

Mistah Mule stopped short.

“Giddap! Giddap!” Johnnie shouted. “My goodness! I hope he isn’t going to balk. Go on, there!” And he slapped Mistah Mule with the reins.

Mistah Mule laid back his ears, slowly turned his head, and stared at Johnnie Green. There was no doubt that he had balked.

Johnnie didn’t know what to do. His father was waiting for that part for the mowing-machine. And Johnnie hadn’t even reached the village yet.

He sat unhappily on the seat for a few minutes. And then he made up his mind that he would do something. “I’m going to tie this old mule to a tree and walk to the village and back,” he decided.

So he jumped from the wagon and tried to lead Mistah Mule out of the road.

But that stubborn fellow wouldn’t stir.