THE BLACKSMITH WINS


After kicking the pail in the blacksmith’s shop, Mistah Mule hung his head low, closed his eyes, and pretended to fall asleep.

Johnnie Green, dripping from his plunge into the tub of water, when he dodged the flying pail, looked at Mistah Mule with great disgust. And so did old dog Spot. And so did the blacksmith himself.

“I don’t trust that fellow,” said the blacksmith.

“Nor I!” old Spot barked.

Mistah Mule opened one eye.

“They’s all ’fraid of me!” he chuckled. “This blacksmith, he better take off his leather apron ’fore I tangle him up in it.”

“What’s that?” old Spot demanded.

“Just a-talkin’ to my own self!” said Mistah Mule. “You better run long home, ole dog. You’s liable to git hurt if you stays ’round here. You might git kicked right into the fire.”

Old dog Spot edged away a bit and tucked his tail between his legs. But he didn’t intend to leave. He meant to see everything that happened. He only hoped Johnnie Green would be safe.

Suddenly the blacksmith began to whistle a lively tune, quite as if he hadn’t a care in the world.

“Bring the ropes!” he called to his helper, who looked just as strong as the blacksmith, even if he wasn’t so tall.

In a jiffy they had wrapped several loops of rope about Mistah Mule’s legs. He plunged and swayed. But the more he struggled, the tighter the blacksmith and his helper pulled the ropes. Finally the blacksmith untied Mistah Mule’s halter-strap. And soon Mistah Mule found himself lying upon the floor of the smithy.

Old dog Spot began to wag his tail and prance about Mistah Mule.

“Now what are you going to do?” he yelped. “You made all those threats. But the blacksmith is too smart for you. He’s got you where you can’t move.”

Mistah Mule lay quite still. His eyes were closed. And something very like a snore came from his soft nose. He made no sign that he had heard what old dog Spot said.

Not until four handsome new shoes were nailed fast to Mistah Mule’s feet did the blacksmith let him get up.

“I wish everybody on our farm had been here to see you shod,” old dog Spot told him.

“An’ so does I!” Mistah Mule cried. “’Tain’t every day it takes two men an’ a boy an’ a ole dog to shoe anybody in this smithy.”

Mistah Mule trotted briskly home with Johnnie Green and old dog Spot together in the wagon. He never balked once. He knew there ought to be a good dinner waiting for him in the barn; and he was hungry.