WESTWARD WITH THE GRAND TRUNK PACIFIC

"'What went ye out into the wilderness to see?'  They answered thus, 'So that we might not see the city.'"--SIR WILLIAM BUTLER.


The new steel trail the railway men are laying from Edmonton leads away and away, I cannot say whither.  For these many days I have had an anxious desire to follow it and the glories thereof.  I am tired of this town and of the electrical devices that appear and re-appear in the darkness like eyes that open and shut--wicked eyes that burn their commercial message into my very soul.  I am sick of these saucy, swaggering streets and of sundry of the townspeople.  Come you with me and let us travel down the ways through the heart of the summer!  We shall have breeze and sun in our eyes, and breeze and sun in our hearts.  If you like not the prospect, pray, come no further, for we be contrary the one to the other and no way-fellows.

As we climb on the train this morning, it seems as though our quest for quiet is to be cheated by the wallowing wave of humanity that threatens to submerge us.  Who are these close-nudged folk and whither away?

She who runs may read them for hard-headed, white-handed men in search of "prospects"; brown-throated homesteaders; real-estate agents out for talking points and for snap fortunes; mining engineers with dunnage bags--young fellows all in the full force of life--these, and "the gang," who are ill-looking men and rather dirty.  The gang fare forth to work on the railway grades.  They are always ganging--that is going--for the words are strictly synonymous.  The gang going to the city meet the gang coming out.  And so in everything they are retroactive, and fight much, and swear, to give weight to their differences of opinion.  In one thing only is the gang agreed, no navvy has yet been found who disputed the axiom that the Boss is a yellow canine.

There is a sprinkling of women, too, and we talk to each other in the friendly manner of the country.  A couple of them are half-breed girls, with drooping feathers and skirts that have a hiss.  Surely their men are industrious Indians.  Both are cinched into their clothes like a cayuse into its pack-saddle.  Both have skin the colour of brown coffee into which milk has been poured, and always they are fussing with their pinned-on curls.  "The judicious Hooker" once watched some women doing this, and he said they were "a-dilling and burling their hair."  No one may ever hope to strike out a more apt expression.  The younger of the girls has an indiscreet mouth and desirous eyes.  I should not be surprised, if one of these times our little brown woman found these to be a mortgage on her soul somewhat difficult of discharge.  And the usury, little woman, it troubles me, the usury!

The farmer's wife who shares my seat came to this province ten years ago from the United States.  Her husband made entry for a homestead and she built the house, outbuildings, and fences on it, and bought the implements with money she had saved from school-teaching.  The first year, their crop was frozen; the second, it was hailed out; and the third, a spark from the threshing-machine burned their wheat stacks. Their horses died and they had to incur debt for others.  All this time, the woman supported the household with the returns from her poultry yard and dairy.  These last years have been fat ones, thus enabling them to save sufficient money to send two of their sons to the business college in Town.  The eldest girl is walking with the young man on the adjoining farm and a wedding is brewing.

To my thinking, this homely, ill-accoutred woman is something like a heroine, and it is a pity the end of her troubles is not yet.  Her husband, who appears to be a flabby-spirited fellow, has always wanted to, and has finally decided that he will sell the farm and go to the town to keep a boarding-house.  She is opposed to the move and has been in the town endeavouring to protect her interests in the property, but finds she is unable so to do.  Because of this she has decided to buy the farm from him and has the agreement ready for his signature.  I am astounded by her hardihood.  She has the soul of a warrior.  If the recalcitrant spouse refuses to sell--no, I won't tell what she intends doing, for I am willing to wager you, even to the half of my kingdom, that he sells.

The woman is proud, I can see, and accordingly careful to enlarge on her man's good qualities, but it takes no acuteness to read through her assurances that he is a pessimist and one who always draws tails in the toss of life.

The readers who have come with me thus far may here swing off key, but, People Dear, you would be wrong; she is not chastising him; she is mothering him.  It is a remarkable trait in the make-up of a good woman that she can, in critical junctures, not only be her own mother but may also act in this capacity to the husband of her children.  It is this same office the Holy Ghost performs in the Trinity.

The newsy is giving the last call to breakfast.  He is a full-lifed young man, with a cock-o'-my-walk air.  I would not be surprised if he were hatched out of the egg of a pouter-pigeon.  He serves meals as far as Edson, from whence we will be transferred to a construction train and trust to manna being rained down from heaven.  His tables are crowded with guests, and we sit close like kernels on an ear of corn. For breakfast, there is tea; there is coffee; there are pork chops, and other fat foods which are made palatable by the sprightly addition of sour pickles.  Indeed, you may credit me, this breakfast is not one to be sniffed at.  I drink pannikins of tea that is very strong and green, and fearlessly ask for more.  If there is a happier woman in the North than myself, I have never heard of her.  I quite agree with you; our pouter-pigeon serves the public far more effectually than do the cabineteers, or even the bishops.

We are yet in the wheat belt and the wheat is at flood-tide.  When I see a large stand of grain that is breast-high I say, "Well done, Good Fellows!" and "Haste to the in-gathering!"  The field hears my salutation to the sowers and bows a million heads to me.  And it says, _shibboleth! shibboleth!_  (If you would pick up the talk of the fields you must be still and listen.)

The Hebrews, with ears a-tilt, caught this whisper, and so their word for an ear of wheat was "shibboleth."  It was this word the Ephraimites lisped and so betrayed themselves to Jephthah.  The difference was only one of an aspirate.  What they said was sibboleth.

Now, while one can tell the sound of ripe wheat, no word is exactly descriptive of the odour thereof.  When I am not tired my pen almost catches it.  The odour is an intangible something between dryness and colour, and the sign that expresses it can only be revealed.

It is the mental habit of people to think of wheat as only so many bushels of inert matter that is bought and sold on margins by half-mad men, whereas, in all the world, wheat is the thing most richly alive. It won't die, not for thousands of years.  We would put jars of wheat in the corner-stones of our state buildings, even as the Egyptians buried it in tombs of rock.  It is the only food we could pass down the centuries to posterity, and apart from its scientific value, there is little doubt posterity would appreciate the gift infinitely more than those stupid name-lists of still stupider people.  The grain should be of the highest grade, with the name of the grower and the exact location of his farm added thereto.

Yes! let us tuck away these northern wheat grains till England becomes a republic; the United States a kingdom; and until the yellow peril has turned white.  Let us lay them safely aside for that day when labour and capital have become one, or till a still later epoch when instead of sex in soul, there shall be soul in sex.  Then take them out, Posterity, and crush them into a sacramental wafer that all the world may eat of it as a loving pledge from the twentieth century.

If you think this too long to wait, perhaps you will recall that while the seven sleepers slept, Cæsar was superseded by Christ.  Now, the time they slept was for the lives of three men.

In handling wheat, you have doubtless noticed that it is not only alive but possesses a markedly developed will-power.  It is ever resisting conquest.  They tell me that in the part of the exchange called the pit, you cannot beat back wheat.  Some men have succeeded for a while, but always it has rolled in and smothered its erstwhile victors.  Try to hold a handful and the task is well-nigh impossible.  It slides through your fingers and causes your palm to open involuntarily.  It wearies a man to hold wheat tightly for long.  Oats may be held and other cereals, but not wheat.  Its tendency is to fall to the ground and reproduce.  Thus, it is age-old but still eternally young.  It is the true Isis and no one has lifted its veil.  I tell you men, there is something uncanny and almost wicked about a thing that refuses to die, and it so small as a grain of wheat.

As a whole, this country is not beautiful, but now and then, there come striking pictures.  Here are pleasing lakelets a-flush with ducks; tall cotton-woods which I name the maidens because of their fluffy hair--these, and lush meadows, over which range regiments of asters, sunflowers, and yarrow.  It is a magic lantern fantasia with an occasional muskeg to represent the waits between views.  On the muskegs the trees are so thin and straight they fairly scratch your eyes.

Oh! but it is hot this day, and every leaf seems a green tongue thrust out with thirst.  The sun is making amends for his insulting reticence of last winter.  The Indians call him Great Grandfather Sun, but why, I do not know.

The houses of the homesteaders are built of poplar lumber, weather-stained and ugly.  Others are of logs chinsed with mud and moss.  All are small and favourable neither for hospitality nor reproduction.  Some day, when a large acreage is under crop, pretty bungalows with brave red paint, will edit the scene as in the older and more settled districts of the north.

At every station, land seekers get out and disappear into the trees as if the country ate them up, and, indeed, I am not so sure but it does.

A baby gets off too--a new baby that has come from the city hospital is being brought home.  You would fancy a baby was a miracle the way the men look at it and ask questions.  Her name is Annette.  She was born on duck-day.  Her father works in a saw-mill.  We crowd to the window to watch him meet Annette, for we would see the gladness on his face. He is an admirably strong man, with the hard sinews of a wolf.  He has surely gone through the mill to some effect.  I think he likes Annette, but he looks most at the small mother and he has the mate tone in his voice.

The women ask me concerning my husband, and I say, "Oh yes!  I have a husband up here, somewhere--a big, fair man--I wonder if you have seen him."

They are discreetly silent, but I can see they are hoping I'll catch him.  This is not a case of duplicity on my part but rather of kindness.  It is one's stoutest duty to convey colour and snippets of gossip of women, who, for the long winter months to come, are to remain in these wilds.  You must understand that gossip is not wicked up North.  Besides, this word actually means a sponsor at baptism--an office recognized by all the world as one of unimpeachable respectability.

At Wabamun there is a great sweep of forest, but, a year ago, a great fire raged here and large patches of burnt trees assault the eyes. Hitherto, the homesteaders have had a two-handed harvest, one from their lovely lake and the other from the land, but, nowadays, their richest harvest comes from the summer tourists, who are building up a popular resort at this point.  Summer girls are trespassing on the berry-patches, once the sole preserve of Indian maidens, and Ole Larsen's fishing grounds are full open to sailing yachts and electric launches.  Such fish as Ole could catch, and such fish as his Frau could cook!  Always, I bowed my head over my plate and said the Indian grace, "Spirit, partake."  Ole can tell where the fish are to be found in certain seasons by the movements of the birds.  The fish feed on flies and rise to the surface for them, whereupon a t gull or duck will fall with plummet-like pounce.  White-fish bite in the autumn. "Yumping yiminy, dey yust do."

The remains of the railway construction camps have almost disappeared, and only the bleached bones of horses mark out the long trail of the grading gangs.

Here are the grades I descended a couple of years ago while prospecting over this ground.  What slopes these are to put a horse down.  They are like those described at St. Helena, upon which you might break your heart going up or your neck coming down, with the additional risk of being arrested as a trespasser.  On this place where we once ranged for coal-rights, the real-estate agents have sub-divided the surface into desirable building lots, that sell from three to five hundred dollars the lot.

One day, this lake shore will be a hive of industry, for deep in her loins Mother Earth had hutched her riches of coal and fire-clay, and, mayhap, more minerals that are precious.  Once, in drilling here, our men came upon black sand with a showing of gold, but it petered out, after a couple of inches.  It was with great difficulty they were persuaded to go on with the drilling instead of going to town to file on claims.

Already there are several towns along this lakefront--that is to say, towns consisting of three or four tents or houses.  In the earlier days of the North each settlement was commenced with a fort, now it is begun with a railway station.  The next building to be erected is the station agent's house, which is quickly followed by a restaurant, and a general store with a post-office.  This is the axis from which the homesteaders radiate into the surrounding country, and, presto! before you know it, there is a bank, an implement shop, a church, a hotel, and the other conveniences of modern civilization including mortgages.

Already you may see trails like long black welts across the land--trails that appear to fare forth without any preconceived plan and to hold a lure in their far reaches for happy-go-idlers like you and me.  There is no telling what we might find on them a goodish way off.  The only straight trails made in this North land are made by the engineers, and as you look down the lines you may readily see that they lead into the sky.  I like greatly the unthanked, unknown engineers who beat out these paths for the people who are to come after.  No trumpets herald their coming, or announce the leagues they have herded behind, but I tell you these fellows are a commonwealth of kings, and we may as well stop here for a moment and stand at salute.

And after the engineers came the builders with their sinews of steel to bind the trail.  It is this steel strength that makes the land to bud and blossom.  It is creative.  Well and truly has a builder said that the land without population is a wilderness, and the population without land is a mob.  Yes! it is a steel idol we worship in this country and not one of gold, and we do refuse to grind it to powder and drink thereof, no matter what any Moses or Aaron may say.

This last hour I have been in mind-to-mind talk with a young Englishman who does not think much of Canada.  He speaks of our dismal respectability, our tombstone virtues, and our provincial small-mindedness.  We call our gardens yards, and have no manners to speak of.  Indeed, nothing but a major operation could remedy our boorishness.

Now, all he says is quite true _but I don't believe it_; besides, his English-sure way of summing us up is irritating to my sense of patriotism.

In some places up here he has had to sleep in puppy's parlours, which means with his clothes on.  This must have been uncomfortable in that he still wears leather puttees which are the true hall-mark of men from the British Isles.  He talked about our cold winters and how unbearable they were, just as if the cold were not the sepia the North shoots forth to protect herself from joyous loafers.  I did not say this, for one cannot be polite and patriotic at the same time, and it is well to be polite ... only I remarked that one of these cold days we will shut off the Gulf Stream instead of sending it out to heat up England.

I have no doubt he has private means, for he has travelled widely and is a well-educated man.  He came here to have a go at homesteading. "Have you succeeded?" I ask.  He does not reply except to ejaculate, "Farming--my hat!" whereupon we both laugh, he at the Canadians and I at the English.

The average youth from England finds it trying to be stripped of precedent, and there is nothing approximating Canadian homestead life in London.  We too often forget this and so fail to make allowances for his prejudices and lack of adaptability.  Our government mounts him and puts his foot in the saddle, but he must set the pace himself.  One can hardly expect the government to do more, but yet, it seems a pity so much excellent material is annually lost to the Dominion because we have not the time or means to work it up.  It will take some years to manipulate the crude European immigrants into the mental and physical trim of this Britisher and to inculcate them with equally high political standards.  We do not recognize this, or maintain an easy passivity to it, until at some election crises our hearts fail us for fear because of the preponderance of the foreign vote in educational and moral matters.

And the Englishman and I speak of subjects of grave import, and of how it is not seemly that we trade too freely with foreign peoples (especially with the States of the American Union), neither is it loyal to our most Christian King, George V.  "Wealth at the expense of loyalty is not a thing to be desired," says the Englishman, "and Colonials do well to preserve the integrity of the Empire," to which dictum I make no reply, not being able to gainsay him.  I could wish though that he tell me how we are to avoid so doing.

This dear lad would go into literary work if we read anything in Canada besides statistics, sporting news, and crop forecasts.  In the contemplation of our sordid practicability, he is lost in astonishment. "No, madam, I shall not do it, and I shall tell you my reason," says he.  "If you write with a sense of life or colour along will come some weighty, grim fellows whose business it is to write stock quotations--leaden creatures, believe me--and they will distinctly sniff and sneeze out the word 'impressionistic,' by which they mean fanciful.  Sons of bats!  If once they tried to frame an impression in black and white they might have some proper comprehension of the word. Any uncouth man can state facts, but it is the telling what the facts stand for that hurts.  A coarse man cannot take impressions except from a closed fist, which impression he would probably describe as a 'dint in the pro-file.'  Such an one hears no farther than his ears, although, in not a few cases, this might be no inconsiderable distance."

"No, I will not become the local _littérateur_," continues the lad, "to be received by the community with a mingling of pride and sarcasm.  I tell you what I will do: it is better to be a real-estate broker, in that all conditions tend to what you Colonials call 'a dead sure thing.'  It is the only business in which a man reaps where he does not sow.  I will surely be a real-estate man.  This I will be."

We are come to Edson now--the terminus of the passenger route--but I am going to describe it in another chapter, for it would be ungrateful to bulk it with other events because of the sense of adventure I enjoyed from my visit thereto.