 AN UNLOOKED-FOR INHERITANCE.

A week before, Paul Lessing and his only sister Sally had started for a three week's tour on the continent, with as light-hearted a sense of enjoyment as any boy or girl home for the summer vacation.  They were orphans, with only each other to care for; and Paul had not feared to take up some of their slender capital to enable his sister to complete her college course at Girton.  If she had to earn her own living, she should at least have the best education that money could give; and Sally had made the best use of her opportunity.  Her name was high in the honour list, and Paul decreed that, before any plans were discussed for her future, they should dedicate a certain sum to a foreign tour.

"It will be a good investment, Sally.  You are looking pale after all your work.  We will make no definite plan; it's distance that swallows up the money, so we'll start off for Brussels, and move on when we feel inclined, possibly to the Rhine, and so to Heidelberg."  And Sally, in the joyousness of her mood, felt that all places would be alike delightful in the company of her brother.

Two days later found the brother and sister seated in the garden of the _café_ that adjoins the park at Brussels.  Even now, at eight o'clock in the evening, it was exceedingly hot, and the boughs of the trees overhead, through which here and there a star glimmered, were absolutely motionless.  The band which played was the best string-band in Brussels, attracting a great throng of listeners; and every table around them had its complement of guests; and the civil waiters who flitted hither and thither had almost more than they could do to keep the tables properly served.  Paul was smoking and reading the paper, but Sally needed no better amusement than to watch the various groups about her, and to listen to the exquisite playing of the band.

"We want something like this in England, Paul," she said, laying a hand on his arm--"lots of places like this out-of-doors in the fresh air, under the stars and trees, where people can go and drink their tea or coffee, and listen to music that must refine them whilst they listen."

Paul laid by his paper and laughed.  "Yes," he said, "and when I get into Parliament--if ever--I will do my utmost to make some of our wealthy citizens disgorge a part of their wealth to put places such as this within the reach of everybody.  I confess there are difficulties----"

"What?" inquired Sally, with childish impatience.

"Our beastly climate, to begin with," Paul answered with a little laugh.  "Want of space, and want of trees when you get the space.  Then look at our population in our big cities.  Brussels is just a pocket-town, if you come to compare it with London.  Of course the recreation of the masses is only one of the many vexed questions concerning them that Government eventually must take in hand.  If you want people to be moral, you must give them a chance of enjoying themselves in an innocent fashion."

"Of course, you could do a lot if you once got into Parliament!" cried Sally, with the enthusiasm of her twenty years.  "When shall you get in? and where shall you stand for? and may I help in the election?"

Paul laughed louder than before.  "There's a deal to be done before I can even think of standing for any place.  First, I must accumulate enough capital to bring me in a small independent income.  You know we have not much now."

"You can have anything and everything that belongs to me; I mean to earn my living somehow," declared Sally, sturdily.

"Thank you.  I don't mean to start that way; and money comes in slowly to a barrister, although I am getting on fairly well.  Then I will stand for any place that will return me, after learning my honestly expressed political opinions.  Each man has his pet hobby, and I feel that mine is the bettering of the condition of the masses."

"That will make you popular," said Sally.

"And I don't care a fig for popularity.  I want to help to leave the average condition of the people better than it is at present.  The contrast between the very rich and the very poor of our land is something too awful to contemplate."

His talk, which he had begun half in play, had ended in deadly earnest; and Sally laid her hand mischievously over his eyes.

"Then don't contemplate it--at any rate just now, when I am so merry and happy.  You've not answered my last question.  May I help in your election?  It would be such fun."

"I think not, Sally," Paul said smiling again.

"Oh, what a mass of inconsistency!--when you were saying only to-day that you saw no just cause or impediment why women should not do anything for which they have a special fitness.  Now I feel politics will be my speciality, and I would not canvass for any one unless I quite understood their views."

"Well, my Parliamentary career is in the far future," Paul interposed; "and certainly I should not give my sanction to your undertaking any work of that kind at present.  You are much too young, and much too----"

"Pretty, were you going to add?" broke in Sally, with a ripple of laughter.  "I'm afraid not: enthusiastic would be the more likely adjective for you to use concerning me.  Besides I don't think I am pretty.  'My dear,' said that candid old Miss Sykes to me the other day, 'you might have been very good-looking if all your features were as good as your eyes.'  Why do ladies of a certain age take it for granted that they can say what they choose to the budding young woman? It annoys me frightfully.  Oh, Paul!" with a sudden lowering of her voice, "talking of pretty, there's a perfectly lovely girl who is seated with her mother at the third table from ours.  Don't turn your head too quickly or she will think we are talking of her; and then you can keep your head turned in the direction of the band.  Her profile comes in between it and you."

Paul did as he was bid.  Sally was right, the girl to whom she directed his attention was lovely beyond compare; and yet there was something in her face that failed to satisfy him.  The very perfection, too, of everything about her, gave him a feeling of unconscious irritation.

"Well?" asked Sally, when he turned back to her.

"She's beautiful, certainly; but I don't like her."

"It's just because you did not discover her first."

Paul did not trouble to answer; there was a general stir amongst the company.  The concert was drawing to a close, and the burghers of Brussels began to think of home and bed.  The wives slipped their knitting into their pocket; the husbands bestowed a passing nod and guttural good night to each other as they moved away; and the twinkling lights began to be extinguished one by one.  In the crowd at the entrance Paul and Sally found themselves close to the girl whom Sally had so greatly admired.  She was talking in low, clear tones to her mother.

"Ought not to have come?  What nonsense, mother!  It has been quite an amusing experience to see the way these people pass their evenings; they are quite nice and respectable.  I confess now I should be glad to see our carriage.  I feel I'm getting smoke-dried like bacon--or ham, is it?"

It was evident that the elder of the two ladies was rather frightened and losing her head.

"I'll not do this again without a man of our own," she said with nervous irritability.

Paul stepped forward, raising his hat.  "Is your carriage anywhere about?  Can I get it for you?"

"Oh, thank you so much.  It's a private one from the Hotel de Flandres, and I told the man to stop here."

"Unfortunately the police regulations interfere with your orders," Paul said, with a slight smile.  "He must take his place in the ranks.  I will soon find it for you if you will stay here."

"Name, Webster," said the older lady.

So Paul, with a nod to Sally to stay where she was, hurried off, returning in a moment with the carriage.

"Thanks so much," said the girl whom Sally admired, as Paul handed her in and closed the door behind her.

"I was quite glad of the time to consider her more closely!" cried Sally, as they drove off.  "I've never seen what I call an absolutely perfect face before.  I wonder if I shall see her again?"

"For my part I don't wish it," Paul answered carelessly.  "Beautiful she is; but she bears the knowledge of it about with her like an overpowering perfume, and is the very impersonation of the insolence of riches!"

"Why, Paul, you are not often either narrow-minded or unjust."

"How dare she comment upon these Belgians, who nearly all possess a smattering of English, under their very noses!" continued Paul, angrily.  "'Quite nice and respectable,' indeed!  As she and her mother were in a fix I was bound, as a man, to offer my services; but I did it unwillingly."

Paul's indignation was short-lived, and he and Sally walked along the streets leisurely, on their way back to their hotel, talking on indifferent subjects.  They paused in the hall of the hotel, running their eyes over the letters displayed outside the post-office, to see if the evening post had brought any for them.  There were none for Sally; but two or three for Paul, that had been forwarded from his chambers in London.

"I'll go into the salon and read them, and then we'll go upstairs to bed.  I feel infected by the early hours of these foreigners," he said, yawning a little.

Sally turned over the leaves of a paper whilst her brother opened his letters.  The last of them he read and re-read several times; then rose and laid his hand on Sally's shoulder.

"I'm awfully sorry, Sally, but I shall have to go back to London by the first train to-morrow."

The long-drawn "O-o-o-h!" was powerless to express half the disappointment his sister felt.

"It's business, I suppose: everything nasty is always business," she said at last.

"Well, no, it's not business; and it certainly is not pleasure.  You remember I had an old godfather, Major Lessing?  I'm sure he amply fulfilled his godfatherly duty by the silver milk-jug he gave me at my baptism--which I've never set eyes on for many a long year, by the way--and the tips he shoved into the palm of my hand whenever I paid him a visit on my way from school.  I don't think I've seen him since; and why, now that he's dying, he has a particular desire for a call, I can't tell you.  It's inconvenient, to say the least of it."

"_Must_ you go?" asked Sally, despairingly.

"I'm afraid so.  It's the last thing one can do for him, poor old chap!"

"He might have chosen some other time to be ill," said Sally, who, not knowing the major, was inclined to be heartless.

"Well, yes.  But we won't lose our holiday; we'll come again later, Sally."

"We shan't!  I'm perfectly certain we shan't!" cried Sally, turning away her head so that Paul should not see that there were tears in her eyes.  "It was too delightful a plan to carry out."

The next day found Paul and his sister back in London.  Sally was to go to an aunt for a few days, until Paul could settle his plans; and when he had seen her off from the station, he turned his own steps in the direction of the quiet square where his godfather had spent his solitary life since the days of his retirement from active service. His eyes turned instinctively to the windows, to see if the blinds were drawn down; but the house wore its usual aspect of dignified reserve, with its slightly opened casements.  The imperturbable butler, who answered Paul's ring at the bell, seemed at first inclined to question his right to enter.

"My master is very sadly, sir; he's not fit to see any one."

"But he sent for me," said Paul, quietly.  "Will you let him know, as soon as possible, that Paul Lessing has come in answer to his letter?"

At the mention of the familiar name Smith's manner altered perceptibly; he threw open the library door and ushered Paul in.  It was scarcely a minute before he returned.

"My master is awake and will see you at once, sir."

"Has he been long ill?" Paul asked.

"It's been coming on gradual for a year or more, sir.  Creeping paralysis is what the doctors call it.  He's no use left in his legs, and very little in his arms or hands; but his brain seems as active as ever.  He took a turn for the worse last week, and the end, they think, may come at any time."

"Thank you; I'll go upstairs now."

He entered the sick-room so quietly that the nurse, who sat by the bedside, did not hear him; but the grey head on the pillow turned quickly, and the dying eyes shone with eager welcome.

"I'm glad you've come; I thought you meant to leave it till too late," was the abrupt greeting.

"I was abroad, and did not get your letter at once," Paul said gently.

"And you came back?  That's more than many fellows would have done. Nurse, draw up those blinds, and leave us, please; there are several things I have to say.  No, you need not talk about my saving my strength.  What good will it do?  A few minutes more life, perhaps," he added testily, as he saw the nurse giving Paul some admonition under her breath.  "Women are a nuisance, Paul; and at no time do they prove it more than when you are ill and under their thumb.  There! take a seat close by me, where I can see you."

"You wanted to see me about something particular, your lawyer told me," said Paul, filled with pity at the sight of the perfectly helpless figure.  "It may be that I can carry out some wish of yours.  I should be glad to be of service to you."

Major Lessing did not answer for some minutes, and Paul ascribed his silence to exhaustion.  In reality the keen eyes were scanning Paul's face critically, as if trying to read his character.

"I wanted to see you; and now you've come I don't know what to make of you.  It has crossed my mind more than once since I've lain here, that I've been a rash fool to make a man I know so little of, my heir."

Paul could not repress an exclamation of astonishment; the news gave him anything but unmixed pleasure.

"It was surely very rash, sir.  I've no possible claim upon you.  I have scarcely even any connection with you except the name."

"That's it," said the major.  "You have the name, and that must be carried on and a distant tie of relationship; and there's something else, Paul.  Years ago I wanted to marry your mother.  You are my godson; you might have been my real son, you see."

Paul felt a lump in his throat; this love-story of long ago was pathetic.  His mother had died when he was still quite a child, but she lived in his memory as beautiful and fascinating.

"She was half Irish," he said.

The major nodded.  "So, partly from sentimental reasons, and partly because there was no one better, I've left the property at Rudham to you," he went on with a smile.  "There would have been plenty of money to have left with it; but I've made some very bad speculations lately, and lost a great deal.  I took to speculation from sheer want of amusement.  I was a good billiard player as long as I had the use of my limbs; but here I've been, literally tied by the legs, for the last two years.  The only thing properly alive about me was my brain, and speculation has interested me; but I was badly hit ten days ago.  There will be some money, but you won't be a rich man."

"I don't care about it," interposed Paul, eagerly.

"Then you ought to; a landlord poorly off is in a bad case in these days; and I want things kept as they are, Paul.  I've not lived at Rudham, but I've kept my eye on it all the same; and what you call progress, and its attendant abominations, has not hurt it much yet.  I made a mistake when I let the bishop nominate a successor to the living when old Gregg died three years ago.  Curzon's a go-ahead fellow, from all that I hear; I don't want a go-ahead squire."

"I'm afraid you've made another mistake, and, if there's time, you had better undo it," said Paul, gravely.

"Do I look like a man who can re-arrange all his matters?" asked the Major, irritably.  "After all, what I ask of you is no very hard thing to grant; simply to accept the good the gods provide, and let well alone."

"But that for me is an impossible condition," said Paul.  "I cannot let things alone if I feel that I can better them.  I'm in no way fitted for a country squire; I've been brought up on different lines from you, and arrived at very different conclusions.  I am grateful to you for your thought of me, but I want to live my own life unfettered by any conditions."

"And this is how you show your readiness to carry out any wish of mine?" said the major, bitterly.

"I'm sorry; but I promised in the dark, not knowing that my principles would be involved."

"I'm glad to hear you have any.  May I ask what you call yourself?  A Lessing who is not a Conservative is not worthy of the name."

"I scarcely know what I am; but my friends call me a Socialist."

"Then in Heaven's name, I've made a bigger blunder than the last!" said the squire, with an odd thrill in his voice.

"It's not my fault; and there may still be time to undo it," said Paul, rising, for the flush that crept to the major's temples warned him that the interview had been too long and too exciting.  "I would thank you, if I could, for the thought of me, and I am sorry to have been the cause of disappointment, but it would not have been honest to hide my opinions."

"No; you've been honest enough, in all conscience.  If there's yet time----"  He broke off, turning away his head, and taking no notice of Paul's departure.

All that night Paul paced his room in deep thought.  The scene he had witnessed had stirred him more than a little; and it grieved him to his heart that he had so seriously disturbed the last moments of a dying man.

"But I could not have hoodwinked him," he thought; "no honest man could.  But to-morrow I'll prove to him that I am ready to help him in any way that I can.  If he will only talk quietly, and keep his temper, he could surely suggest some more fitting heir than I; and the business details could be fairly quickly settled if I could take down his wishes and see his lawyer.  He must yet have several days to live, I should think, with his extraordinary vitality of brain."

At a very early hour the following morning, therefore, Paul presented himself again at the house in the square, with the request that he might have a short interview with the major.

"Very sorry, sir," said Smith, with an added gloom of manner, "but my master's much worse; they don't think he'll live through the day.  He was very restless last night; and nothing would satisfy him but that I should go off in the middle of the night and fetch Mr. Morgan--the lawyer as wrote to you, sir; but when I got him here my master had lost his power of speech.  He knew Mr. Morgan quite well, but he could not make him understand what he wanted."

"And now?" asked Paul, pitifully.

"The doctor is just coming down the stairs, and will speak to you, sir."

Paul went out into the hall to meet him.  "How did you find the major?" Paul inquired.

"Dead," replied the doctor, drawing on his gloves.  "He died as I entered the room."



