CHAPTER I

"There!  What did I tell you?  The news is out!"

With a muttered exclamation of annoyance, Kenneth Traynor put down his coffee cup with a crash and, leaning over the table, pointed out to his wife a despatch from London, given prominence in the morning paper, which ran as follows:


Advices from Cape Town report the finding on a farm near Fontein, a hundred miles north of here, of a diamond which in size is only second to the famous Koh-i-noor.  The stone, which is in the shape of an egg with the top cut off, weighs 1,649 carats, and was discovered after blasting at the foot of some rocks on land adjacent to the tract owned by the Americo-African Mining Company of New York.  It is understood that the American Company is negotiating for the property; some say the transfer has already been made.  If this is true, the finding of this colossal stone means a windfall for the Yankee stockholders.


The Traynor home, No. ---- Gramercy Park, was one of those dignified, old-fashioned residences that still remain in New York to remind our vulgar, ostentatious _nouveaux riches_ of the days when culture and refinement counted for something more than mere wealth.  Overlooking the railed-in square with its green lawns, pretty winding paths and well-dressed children romping at play, it had a high stoop which opened into a wide hall, decorated with obsolete weapons and trophies of the hunt.  On the right were rich tapestries, masking the folding doors of a spacious drawing-room, richly decorated and furnished in Louis XIV. period.  Beyond this, to the rear of the house which had been built out to the extreme end of the lot, was the splendidly appointed dining-room with its magnificent fireplace of sculptured white marble, surmounted by a striking portrait in oils by Carolus Duran of Mrs. Traynor--a painting which had been one of the most successful pictures of the previous year's salon.

In a clinging, white silk negligée gown, the gossamer folds of which only partially veiled the outlines of a slender, graceful figure, Helen sat at the breakfast table opposite her husband, toying languidly with her knife and fork.  It was nearly noon, long past the usual breakfast time, and by every known gastronomical law her appetite should have been on keen edge.  But this morning she left everything untasted. Even the delicious wheat cakes, which none better than Mammy, their Southern cook, knew how to do to a point, did not tempt her.  They had been out to dinner the night before.  Her head ached; she was nervous and feverish.  Always full of good spirits and laughter, ever the soul and life of the house, it was unusual to find her in this mood, and if her husband, now voraciously devouring the tempting array of ham and eggs spread before him, had not been so absorbed in the news of the day, he would have quickly noticed it, and guessed there was something amiss.

Certainly the appearance of the dining-room was enough to upset the nerves of anyone, especially a sensitive young woman who prided herself on her housekeeping.  All around was chaos and confusion.  The usually sedate, orderly dining-room was littered with trunks, grips, umbrellas and canes enveloped in rugs--all the confusion incidental to a hurried departure.

She took the newspaper, read the despatch and handed it back in silence.

"Isn't that the very deuce!" he went on peevishly.  "We've been trying our utmost to keep it secret.  Unless we're quick, there'll be a rush of adventurers from all parts of the world before we can secure the options.  Happily the despatch is vague.  They don't know all the facts.  If they did----"  Lowering his voice and looking around cautiously to make sure that the butler had left the room and no one was listening, he continued: "Besides you know what I am to bring back. It couldn't be entrusted to anyone else.  Just think--a stone worth nearly a million dollars!  I hope no one will guess I have it in my possession.  It must be brought safe to New York.  That's why it's so important that I go at once.  Even by catching the _Mauretania_ to-morrow, I can't reach Cape Town for a month, and every moment counts now."

As Helen was still silent he glanced across the table at her for the first time.  Her pallor and the drooping lines about her mouth told him something was wrong.  Instantly concerned, he asked:

"What's the matter, dear?"

"I'm horribly nervous."

"What about?"

"This trip of yours, of course."

"You ought to be used to them by this time.  This isn't the first time I've had to leave you since our marriage."

"I didn't mind the other trips so much.  When you went to Mexico and Alaska, it didn't seem so far away.  But this journey to South Africa is different.  You are running a terrible risk carrying that diamond. I can't shake off a horrible feeling that something dreadful will happen."

Surprised less at what she said than at her serious manner, he laid down the newspaper, and, jumping up, went over to her.  His wife sat motionless, her lips trembling, her large eyes filled with tears.  In spite of a palpable effort at self-control, it was evident that she was laboring under great nervous tension.  Bending caressingly over her, he said anxiously:

"Why Helen, old girl!  What's the matter?"

She made no answer.  Her head fell on his breast.  For a moment she could not speak.  Her emotion seemed to choke her utterance, paralyze her speech.  He insisted:

"What is it, dearie?" he demanded.

"I'm so nervous about your going, I'm so afraid about your having the diamond," she sobbed.  Suddenly, as if unable longer to control herself, she rose from the table and threw her arms around his neck. Passionately she cried: "Oh, Kenneth, don't go!  Don't go!  I feel that something will happen."

He laughed carelessly as he fondled her.  More seriously he replied:

"I hope something does happen.  That's what I'm going out there for. Why, Helen dear, I don't think you quite realize what this trip means to us.  If the deal goes through, and we get full control of all that property, we'll all be as rich as Croesus.  Just think, dear, 300,000 square miles of the most wonderful diamond producing country.  In ten days they found 400 beautifully clear stones, some of them weighing over a hundred carats.  If the reports are true, we shall have a group of mines as valuable as the famous De Beers group.  Do you know what they have produced to date in actual money?"

The young woman shook her head.  Usually she was glad enough to listen to her husband's business plans, but to-day they wearied her.  Her mind was too much preoccupied with something that concerned her far more. The idea of this coming separation, the knowledge that he was running a risk, had left her singularly depressed.  She had tried to remain calm and control her emotion, but the effort was beyond her.  The prospect of this separation, with its vague, undefined forebodings of disaster, was simply intolerable.  The tears she was unable to restrain rolled silently down her cheeks.

He looked at her in surprise.  Never had he seen her in this mood. Approaching her more closely, he said kindly:

"That can't be the only reason, dear, what's the matter?"

She hesitated a moment before she answered:

"I'm very nervous to-day.  I was dreadfully irritated last night at the dinner.  I wish I hadn't gone----"

"Who irritated you?"

"That man Signor Keralio.  I simply can't tolerate the man.  How I hate him!"

"Why--what did he do?"

"He did nothing.  He wouldn't dare--there.  But I wouldn't care to be alone with him.  His eyes were enough.  He imagines he is irresistible, and that every woman is immoral.  That is the kind of man he is.  He annoyed me all evening.  There was no getting away from him."

Kenneth laughed and went back to finish his breakfast, quite indifferent to what he had just heard.  He knew his wife too well to be afraid of any number of Signor Keralios.  Humming a tune, he said carelessly:

"Why didn't you call me?"

"What?  Create a scandal?  That would only make me ridiculous.  He wouldn't care.  I can't bear the sight of the man, yet I have to be polite to him."

Kenneth nodded.

"Yes--I have reasons for not caring to quarrel with Keralio just now."

She looked up quickly.

"Why?  What is that man to you?  He's your fencing master, I know, but that's no reason for making a friend of him.  I never understood why you associated with him.  He is so different to you."

Her husband smiled.  He adored his wife and admired the sex in general, but, like most men, he had never had much respect for women's judgment. Women were made to be loved; not to discuss business with.  Indulgently he said:

"My dear, you don't understand.  I have important financial relations with Keralio.  I don't care for him myself, but one can't choose one's business associates.  He and I are interested in a silver mine in Mexico.  Thanks to him, I got in on the ground floor.  One of these days the investment will bring me a big return."

His wife shrugged her shoulders.  Incredulously she retorted:

"Not if Keralio has anything to do with it.  I don't trust him.  He has deceit and evil written all over his face."

Amused at her petulance, Kenneth jumped up impulsively and took his wife in his arms.

Abandoning herself willingly to his embrace, for a moment her head fell back on his broad shoulder, and she smiled up at him.  From her soft, yielding form arose that subtle, familiar perfume, the intoxicating, vague, indefinable aroma of the well groomed woman that never fails to set a man's blood on fire.  Bending low until his mouth touched hers, he kissed her until her face glowed under the ardor of his amative caress.  But to-day she was not in the mood to respond.

"Don't--don't!" she panted, striving to free herself.

"Admit that you're foolish or I'll do it again," he laughed.

"Perhaps I am.  It's selfish of me to make it harder for you to go away."

The butler reëntered the room with the finger bowls, and she quickly disengaged herself.  To hide her confusion, she turned to the servant:

"Did my sister go out, Robert?"

"Yes, m'm," replied the man respectfully.  "Miss Ray told me to tell you in case you asked that she had gone shopping and would be back soon."

"Where's Miss Dorothy?"

"The fraulein took her to the park, m'm."

"When fraulein comes in, tell her to bring Dorothy upstairs."

"Very well, m'm."

The butler went out and Helen turned to her husband.  Anxiously she said:

"I've been a little worried about Dorothy lately.  She's not looking well.  I think she needs the country."

Kenneth looked up quickly.  Next to his wife he loved his flaxen haired little girl better than anything in the world.  There was a worried look on his face as he asked:

"What does the doctor say?"

"Oh, it's nothing to be alarmed at.  Only she's growing fast, and needs all the air possible.  I'm thinking of sending her to Aunt Carrie for a while.  You know she has a beautiful place in the suburbs of Philadelphia.  She would be out in the air all the time."

"Yes--that's a good idea.  Send her there by all means.  Write your aunt to-night."

Helen glanced at the clock.  There wasn't any time to lose.  Turning to her husband she said quickly:

"You had better come upstairs and finish your packing, dear.  Your trunks aren't nearly ready and the expressman was ordered for three."

Recalled thus abruptly to the day's duties, he turned docily and followed her upstairs.

Beautiful as was the Traynor home below, it was in the library in the second floor that Helen always felt happiest and most at ease.  Up the broad, thickly carpeted stairs and turning to the right as the landing was reached, they entered the library, a room of truly noble proportions extending the entire width of the house and with deep recessed windows and low seats, overlooking the park.  The furnishings, though simple, were rich and luxurious.  The woodwork was of black Flemish oak, the ceiling beamed with a dull red background.  The upholstery was a rich red plush throughout, with deep seated armchairs, and sofas built close to the wall wherever space permitted.  In the corners, numerous electric reading lamps could be turned on or off at pleasure, constituting ideal nooks for reading.  The furniture, apart from the red plush armchairs, was of black Flemish oak to match the woodwork, with an immense richly carved black oak dark table in the center of the room, lighted by an electrolier of similar size and design to the one in the dining-room.

It was in this room with its atmosphere of books so conducive to peace and introspection that Helen loved to spend her spare time.  The walls were literally lined with tomes, dealing with every branch of human knowledge--religion, science, philosophy, literature.  Here when alone she enjoyed many an intellectual treat, browsing among the world's treasures of the mind.  Even when her sister had a few intimates to tea, or when friends dropped in in the evening, they always preferred being in the library to anywhere else.

Only second to the library in the affection of its young mistress was her bed chamber with which it was connected by a small boudoir. Furnished in Louis XVI. style, it was a beautiful room, decorated in the most dainty and delicate of tones.  The bed, copied after Marie Antoinette's couch in the Little Trianon was in sculptured Circassian walnut, upholstered in dull pink brocade, the broad canopy overhead being upheld by two flying cupids.  The handsome dressing table with three mirrors and chairs were of the same wood and period.  On the floor was a thick carpet especially woven to match the other furnishings.

To-day, littered as it was with trunks and clothes, the room lacked its usual sedateness and dignity, but Helen did not mind.  She would have preferred it to look far worse if only her loved one were not going away.  His clothes lay scattered all over the floor.  There was still much to be done.

Kenneth himself realized it as he ruefully surveyed the scene.  Hurry he must.  A director's meeting to-night, the steamer sailing to-morrow and here he was not nearly ready.  Helen could see no reason why François should not do the packing, but he insisted on doing it himself, and was soon deep in the work of filling the trunks that stood around.

While he worked, almost unconscious of her presence, she sat disconsolately on a trunk and watched him, and from time to time, as if ashamed to let him see her weakness, she turned her head aside to furtively wipe away a tear.  No doubt her misgivings were foolish. Husbands left their wives on business trips every day.  Sensible women were not so silly as to cry over it.  It was to be only temporary, she knew that, yet her heart misgave her.  She had tried to be resigned to this South African journey, to accept it without protest, but her feelings were too much for her.  When she married Kenneth Traynor, the energetic, prosperous Wall Street promoter, everybody knew that it was a love match.  Standing six feet two in his stockings, muscular, sinewy, without an ounce of superfluous fat, Kenneth Traynor looked as though he could give a good account of himself no matter in what tight place he found himself.  His clean cut features and strong chin denoted strength of character, his deep set blue eyes, a blue of a shade so light rarely seen except in the peasants of Normandy, beamed with frankness and honesty, a kindly smile hovered about his smooth, firm mouth.  What at once attracted attention was his hair which was dark and unusually thick and bushy and a peculiar characteristic was a solitary white lock in the center of his forehead.  Such a phenomenon of the capillary glands was not uncommon, but as a rule, the white hair is on the side of or at the back of the head.  In Kenneth's case, it was the very center of the forehead and imparted to his face an individuality quite its own.

When on leaving college, he had been forced, like other young men, to choose a career, he was unable to decide what he wanted to do.  Doctor, lawyer, architect, author--none of these suited his nervous, restless temperament.  He craved a more exciting life, and at one time thought seriously of entering the army with the hope of seeing active service in the Philippines.  But Aguinaldo's surrender put a quietus on this project, and he entered a broker's office in Wall Street Here, in the maelstrom of frenzied finance, his pent up energies found an outlet. He went into the stock gambling game with the feverish energy of a born gambler.  Months of excitement followed, luck being usually with him. He was successful.  He doubled and tripled his capital, after which he had good sense enough to stop, withdrawing from the fray before the tide turned.  But he could not give up the life entirely.  The business of stock promotion was the next best substitute.  It was about that time he met the woman he married.

It had been an ideal union in every way, but even Helen herself could not have guessed that day now three years ago when she left the church a bride, how completely, how entirely this man whose sterling qualities, good nature and charm of manner had won her heart, would take complete possession of her, body and soul.  Instead of the romance flickering out after the first sudden blaze of fierce passion, as it usually does after the first few months of married life, on her side, at least, the flame had gathered in strength until now it was the one compelling, all absorbing interest in her life.

She recalled how they had first met.  It was in the Winter time.  She was skating in Central Park.  A thaw had set in and the ice was dangerous.  Suddenly there was an ominous crack, and the crowd scurried out of harm's way, all but one child, a little nine year old girl who, in her eagerness to escape, stumbled and fell.  The next instant she was in the water, disappearing under the ice.  Just at that moment, a tall athletic figure dashed swiftly to the hole and, stooping quickly, caught the child by the dress.  Then, by a feat of almost superhuman strength which awed the crowd into silence, he drew the little victim out to safety, not much the worse for her experience.

Spellbound, hardly able to breathe from sheer excitement, Helen had watched the work of rescue.  When the stranger, tall, muscular, handsome, passed her, carrying tenderly his burden, a human life saved from a watery grave, she could not help murmuring:

"Oh, how brave of you!"

"Nonsense," he retorted abruptly.  "It's nothing to make a fuss about."

She did not see him again for six months, and had almost forgotten the incident when one night at the opera during a performance of "Tannhauser," a man, tall, square shouldered, entered the box where she was and was presented to her.

"Helen--Mr. Traynor."

It was her hero.

He had remained her hero ever since.

She remembered the afternoon when he had asked her to be his wife. They were alone in the library which overlooked the Park with its beautiful vista of green foliage, its glimpse of rolling lawns, and shimmering lakes.  They were standing side by side, gazing idly out of the window, conversing quietly on all kinds of topics interesting to them both.  She was enjoying his vigorous, masculine point of view and feeling strangely happy in his company.

"When should a man marry?" he asked all at once.

Startled for a moment at the abruptness of the question which nothing in their previous conversation had led up to, she answered gravely:

"When he's tired of being alone and when he feels he has met the woman with whom he can be happy, the kind of woman who will be a real helpmate and aid him to achieve his ambitions."

"How can he know that the woman to whom he is attracted will have this influence in his life?  How can he distinguish real gold from the imitation which merely glitters?"

"Only by his instinct.  That never errs."

"And when in your opinion, should a woman marry?"

"When she meets the man to whom she feels she can give herself without forfeiting her self-respect."

He nodded approvingly, and looked at her for a few moments without speaking.  Outside it was growing dark, for which she was glad, for her face burned under the earnestness of his gaze.  Finally he said:

"You are right.  But yours is a point of view the modern girl seldom takes.  First she discusses ways and means.  Love, self respect--these she considers quite negligible."

She protested.

"Not all girls--only some girls.  They are foolish virgins who leave their lamps untrimmed.  They sow folly to-day only to reap unhappiness to-morrow."

He said nothing and for a few moments they both stood there in the increasing darkness.  Suddenly, without a moment's warning, his voice broken by emotion, he turned to her and said:

"I am tired of being alone.  I have met the woman with whom I could be happy, the woman who can help me to do big things.  Helen, I want you to be my wife."

She made no answer.  She felt herself growing pale.  A strange tremor passed through her entire body.

He came closer and took her unresisting hand.

"Helen," he whispered, "I want you for my wife."

Still no reply, but her small delicate hand remained clasped in his big, strong one, and gradually he drew her toward him until she was so close in his embrace that he could feel her panting breath on his cheek.

A strange thrill passed through him as he came in contact with her soft, yielding body.  She never wore corsets, preferring the clinging Grecian style of gowns that showed graceful lines and left the figure free, and her form, slender yet firm and delicately chiseled like that of some sculptured goddess, had none of that voluptuous grossness which mars the symmetry of many women, otherwise beautiful.

As she nestled there, pale and trembling in his strong arms, he did not dare move, for fear that he might unwittingly injure a being so frail and delicate.  All his life Kenneth had lived a clean life.  He had not led the riotous, licentious kind of existence which some men of his means and opportunities think necessary to their comfort.  He had never been a libertine.  He had respected women; indeed, had rather avoided them.

But if a man, busily engaged in the battle of life, his mind always engrossed in serious affairs, succeeds in keeping natural instincts under control there comes a day when nature asserts herself, when his manhood demands the satisfaction of legitimate cravings.  This bachelor who had lived a secluded, hermit-like kind of existence till he was thirty was suddenly and violently awakened to the fact that he was made of flesh and blood as are other men.  This slim girl with her sweet ways, her pretty face, her ready wit, had completely vanquished him, and not alone did she satisfy him mentally, she also attracted him physically.

He realized it now as he held her tight against his breast.  Her head had fallen on his shoulder.  Her face with its pale, delicate profile was turned toward him, the eyes half closed.  The mouth, arched like Cupid's bow and partly open, disclosing the white, moistened teeth, and red and luscious like some rare exotic fruit, was tempting enough to madden a saint.  Kenneth was only human.  Unable to resist, he lowered his head until his mouth grazed hers and then with a wild, almost savage exclamation of joy, the exultant cry of lust awakened and gratified, his lips met hers and lingered.

To Helen it seemed as though she was in a dream of untold ecstasy. Always a shrinking, modest girl, especially in the company of the opposite sex, in any calmer moment she would have been shocked beyond expression at this momentary abandonment she permitted herself.  As she lay in this man's arms and felt his warm kisses on her lips, there came over her a strange sensation she had never known before.  She grew dizzy and for a moment thought she would faint.  All at once he released her.  Almost apologetically, he murmured:

"Forgive me--I lost control over myself--I want you Helen--I want you for my wife.  Will you marry me?"

She drew away and turned away her head, so he might not see her burning cheeks.

He persisted.

"Will you marry me?"

She hesitated a moment before replying.  Then, very simply, she answered:

"Yes, Kenneth."

That was three years ago.