CHAPTER IV

The dirty, sullen waters of the harbor washed lazily against the black, precipitous sides of the giant liner which, under a full head of steam, vibrated with suppressed energy, straining at mighty cables as if impatient to start on her long and hazardous voyage across the tumbling seas.  A raw, piercing northeaster, howling dismally above the monotonous creaking and puffing of the donkey-engine, swept through the cheerless, draughty dock, chilling the spectators to the marrow.  The sun, vainly trying to break through the banks of leaden-colored clouds, cast a grayish pall over land and sky.  A day it was of sinister portent, that could not fail to have a depressing effect on sailor and landlubber alike.

Yet unpropitious skies and chilly wind did not appear to keep people at home.  The steamer was crowded, both with those who were sailing and those who were not.  The gangways, staterooms were overrun not only by passengers, but by all sorts of visitors curious to get a glimpse of the luxurious liner.  The first-class saloon, heaped high on all sides with American Beauty roses and orchids, looked as gay and full of color as a florist's shop.

"Isn't it perfectly stunning?  How I adore ships!" exclaimed Ray, eager to see everything.

Keeping close together, the two young women with difficulty elbowed their way through the excited throng.  They were anxious to rejoin Kenneth whom they had left in the stateroom giving instructions to François, and they began to be afraid they might lose him in the crush. Delighted at everything she saw, Ray could not contain herself.

"Oh, how I wish I were going!  Why doesn't Ken take me?"

Helen turned to her in mock despair.

"If you went, what would I do?  Who would take care of me?"

"I would," said a masculine voice close by.

The women turned quickly.

A tall, fair man still in his thirties, had stopped and raised his hat.

"Why, it's Mr. Steell!" exclaimed Ray, her pleasure at the meeting betraying itself in the tone of her voice.

"Do you doubt my ability to take care of you?  Could any man wish for a more congenial task?"

"Flatterer!" laughed Helen.  Cordially she added: "I'm awfully glad to see you.  It was very good of you to come and see Ken off."

"Nonsense," exclaimed the newcomer.  "I wanted to come--if only to make sure he wouldn't change his mind.  I'm as anxious to see those diamonds as you are."

"Hush!" said Helen putting up her finger to her mouth while Ray's attention was momentarily diverted elsewhere.  "No one knows--not even Ray.  It's a great secret."

An anxious look passed over the young man's face.  He hadn't approved of this South African trip.  It was wholly unnecessary.  In his opinion his old chum was taking a great risk.

"That's right," he muttered.  "You can't be too careful."

In metropolitan legal circles Wilbur Steell was looked upon as the coming man.  His success in the courts had given him a wide reputation before he was five and thirty, and his gifts as a public speaker, his strong, aggressive personality made more than one political leader anxious to secure his services.  Already he was mentioned as district attorney.  Even the Governorship might have been his for the asking. But he showed no liking for politics.  His sympathies leaned more towards the literary, intellectual life.  Having all the money he needed, he preferred to keep out of the social and political maelstrom, leading a quiet life, following his own tastes and inclinations. Match-making mammas saw in him a prize, but so far he had shown no disposition to marry.  He cultivated few people, in fact, was considered somewhat of a misanthrope.  Kenneth he had known all his life.  They were boys together, and the Traynors were among the few on whom he called frequently.  He made no secret of his attraction for Ray, and the young girl liked him as well as she chose to like anybody. He had qualities, not usually met with in successful men, that made a strong appeal to her--fine ideals, and a purpose in life.  She liked his seriousness, finding him different in this respect from any other man she knew.  She felt he admired her, but he did not make love to her and she was grateful to him for that.  She liked his society and never tired of discussing with him sociology and other subjects in which both were interested.

"When does the steamer sail?" interrupted Ray anxiously, as if afraid that they might go off with her on board.

"In half an hour," said the lawyer.  "They ring a warning bell.  There is plenty of time.  Where's Kenneth?"

"Down below in his stateroom--wrestling with baggage," replied Helen. "He said he would join us here."

"Well, suppose we sit down a bit," he suggested.

"Yes--that will be jolly," exclaimed Ray.

The lawyer pulled up three steamer chairs and sitting down, they watched the crowd which had already begun to thin out.  The novelty of the scene held both women fascinated.  The constant bustle and excitement, the going and coming of well-groomed men and women, the little scraps of conversation overheard, interested them both beyond measure.  Helen studied each individual couple, wondering who they were, how long married, if they were happy, where they were going to. She wondered if that coarse, loudly dressed woman really cared for her husband, or if this brutal looking man with insolent stare of the libertine, illtreated his delicate little wife.  She herself could not understand marriage without genuine affection on both sides.  Any such intimate relation as the marriage tie involved must surely be repellent and abhorrent to any self-respecting woman unless love were there to sanction and sanctify it.

Ray glanced at her sister and laughed.

"Why so serious, Helen?  He hasn't gone yet."

Helen sighed.

"But he soon will be.  I wish he were here instead of downstairs."

Ray protested.

"Please be nautically correct.  Remember we are on a ship.  You don't say 'downstairs'; you say 'below.'"

Mr. Steell turned round with a smile.

"I had no idea you were so well posted in sailor's parlance."

The young girl laughed.

"Oh, you don't know half my accomplishments.  I'm cleverer than you give me credit for."

The young man leaned half over the chair as he whispered:

"I wouldn't dare tell you how clever I think you."

"Why?"

"Because--of my own peace of mind."

Helen broke in on the conversation.  Addressing the lawyer, she said:

"Now Kenneth is away, we shall expect you to come to the house very often."

The lawyer bowed.

"It's always a pleasure to call."

"Be sure to come next Sunday evening.  I expect some friends.  We'll have some music."

"May I bring someone?"

"Certainly.  Any friend of yours is welcome."

"Who is it?" asked Ray impertinently.  "Male or female?"

"I believe it's a male," smiled the lawyer.  "It looks like a male and talks like one."  More seriously he went on: "His name is Dick Reynolds.  He has just passed his bar examination and is practicing temporarily in my office.  His people live out West and being alone here, he is glad enough to have somewhere to go."

"Bring him by all means," exclaimed Ray.  "Has he any accomplishments--apart from being a male?"

"Yes--he plays the piano indifferently, and tennis admirably.  He swims like a fish, and can run like a hare.  But his best accomplishment is a gift that one seldom sees developed----"

"What is that?" exclaimed both his listeners at once.

"He is a born detective--a regular Sherlock Holmes in real life.  I have tested him several times with extraordinary results.  I have given him the most difficult cases to unravel.  He has found the solution in every one."

Ray clapped her hands.

"Oh, I love that," she said.  "Don't forget to invite him.  Only the trouble is we have nothing to unravel."

"I have a skein of silk," interrupted Helen facetiously.

Suddenly the lawyer stopped speaking and quickly sitting up in his chair stared intently in the distance at a face in the crowd which had caught his eye.

"Who is it?" demanded Ray, her woman's jealousy aroused.

"I may be mistaken," he replied, "but I thought I saw your friend Signor Keralio."

Helen looked up quickly.

"My friend?" she exclaimed.  "He's no friend of mine.  I wonder what he's doing here.  He can't be sailing."

"He's up to no good, I wager that," growled the lawyer.

"You don't like him either, do you?" smiled Ray.

"Does anyone?" he answered.  "I don't see how Kenneth can have anything to do with such a cheap type of adventurer."

Helen hastened to explain.

"Ken doesn't care for him at all, only they are both interested in the same business deal--a silver mine in Mexico.  Ken bought stock and Keralio is the only man he knows connected with it.  That's why."

The lawyer gave vent to a grunt of disgust.

"If Keralio has anything to do with it, good-bye to Ken's money.  In my opinion the fellow's a crook."

Suddenly Helen pointed to a spot away down at the other end of the deck.

"Yes--you're right--there he is--behind that third lifeboat.  He's talking to some one."

The lawyer looked in the direction indicated.

"Yes--and do you see the secretive way in which they're talking--hiding behind that boat, as if so that no one might see them.  They're plotting some mischief, you may be sure of that.  Who's the other fellow?"

Helen strained her eyes to see.

"I can't see his face.  Oh, yes I can--why--it's our François--Kenneth's valet.  What can they be talking about?  I don't trust that valet.  Only the other day I caught him reading some letters.  I warned Ken about him; but he insists he is faithful--I wonder what they can have in common?  He used to be in Signor Keralio's employ."

The lawyer shook his head ominously.  Gravely he said:

"That fellow Keralio will bear watching.  I think I'll put my Sherlock Holmes on his track."

Ray laughed.

"Oh, that would be exciting--a drama in real life.  Please do----"

"Good morning, ladies!" said a voice close at hand.  "Good morning, Mr. Steell."

All looked up.  A tall, elderly man with white hair, distinguished looking and fashionably dressed, had stopped.

"Why, it's Mr. Parker!" exclaimed Helen holding out her hand.  "You came to see Kenneth off?"

"Yes--where is he?"

"In his stateroom--attending to his baggage.  He'll be here directly."

"I must see him at once."

"Anything important?"

"Very important, indeed," replied the newcomer.

Helen jumped up, all flushed from excitement.

"Please tell me what it is?" she exclaimed.

The old gentleman drew a telegram from his pocket.

"I've just received this from our agent in Cape Town.  Another diamond of extraordinary size has been picked up.  It weighs over 2,000 carats and is calculated to be worth five hundred thousand dollars.  That's the second stone of extraordinary size that we have found.  Possibly there is some exaggeration in the reports, but there is no doubt whatever that we are on the verge of discoveries little short of sensational.  Meantime, the treasury of the Americo-African Mining Company has been enriched by at least a million.  When Kenneth returns to New York with these wonderful gems in his possession, there is likely to be a boom in the company's shares."

The old gentleman spoke glibly, even eloquently and it was obvious that he was sincere and not talking for effect.  It was, indeed, largely due to his distinguished air, and fine oratorical powers that Cornelius Winthrop Parker had been elected president of the Americo-African Mining Company, with fine offices in New York and London and stockholders in every country under the sun.  Trained for the ministry and enjoying a wide acquaintance but a slim income, he had found the business of stock company promotion more profitable than preaching the gospel, and when Traynor had first gone to him with the suggestion that a company be formed to take up the large tract of Transvaal land where precious stones had actually been found he was not slow to grasp at the unusual opportunity.  He managed cleverly the preliminary publicity campaign.  The company was promptly organized and successfully floated, the public snapping as eagerly at the shares as a fish at the bait.  It was only logical to infer, therefore, that when Kenneth returned to New York with actual proof of the company's suddenly acquired wealth in his possession, the stock would soar above par.  With this pleasing prospect in view, it was not surprising that Mr. Parker wore to-day his most engaging smile.

Ray looked up in surprise.

"What!" she exclaimed.  "Kenneth to bring home the diamonds?  This is the first I heard of it.  Helen never told me."

"Hush!" said Mr. Parker, holding up his handy warningly.  "Some one might hear you."  Continuing, he said blandly:

"Of course not, my dear lady, of course not.  Your sister is far too discreet and clever a woman to disclose her husband's plans to the world.  There are some things a man must keep secret from everyone--even from his wife.  It would have been the height of folly to make any such announcement from the housetops.  The highways are full of rogues; even the walls have ears.  Some crook might have learned of our plans and acted accordingly.  Kenneth might be followed to South Africa, shadowed till he has the gems in his possession and then waylaid and murdered.  Remember, he will have stones in his waistcoat pocket worth a million.  Do you suppose desperate men will stop at anything to secure such a prize?"

Ray turned to her sister.

"Did you know?"

Helen nodded.

"Yes, and it has made me very unhappy.  It is terrible that he is taking such risks."  Turning to Mr. Parker she asked apprehensively: "Do you think he will run any danger?"

The old gentleman shook his head.

"Of course not, my dear lady.  It is preposterous to even think of such a thing.  We have kept the matter too secret.  Don't be uneasy.  He will come to no harm."  Raising his hat, he added: "Excuse me, ladies. I'll go and find Kenneth and bring him to you."

The next instant he was swallowed up by the crowd.

Helen, uneasy at her husband's prolonged absence, suggested that they go below and join him.

Suddenly a stentorian voice called out:

"All ashore--all ashore!"

Quickly, Helen jumped to her feet, only to bump into Kenneth, who at that moment ran up, followed by Mr. Parker.

"All ashore, dear," he said hastily, "you had better go."

She made no reply, but averted her head so he might not see her red eyes.

All about them the bustle and excitement was bewildering.  People pushed this way and that in their efforts to reach the gangway.

The siren sounded its last deep toned blasts of warning; the final greetings were exchanged.

Tall and handsome looking in his tourist knicker-bockers and close fitting steamer cap, Kenneth held both Helen's hands in his.  Ray and Mr. Parker, under the pretence of visiting the anchor weighed, had discreetly withdrawn.  François, the valet, could be seen in the distance, making signals to some one on shore.  Husband and wife were standing alone behind one of the big ventilators, Helen glad that no one saw them, ashamed that anyone should detect the big tears she was unable to control.  How she had dreaded this moment of actual parting, this ordeal of saying good-bye!

"You'll write every day, won't you?" she asked in choking voice.

Tenderly he drew her to him.

"Every day, sweetheart."

"And you'll come back safe to me?"

"I'll come back safe to you."

Bravely she forced back the tears that blinded her.  Gently she murmured:

"I'll wait for you, Kenneth.  I shall count the days, every moment, until you return.  I never realized till now how much we are to each other.  I'll pray for you, Kenneth; I'll pray God that He watch over and protect you."

He said nothing, but drew her toward him.  Looking searchingly into her eyes, he said half in jest, half in earnest:

"You'll be true, always true!"

Gravely she answered:

"Always--until death!"

"You'll look at no other man."

"How can you be so foolish, Ken dear?  I see no one but you.  I hear no voice but yours.  You are my life, my soul.  When you return you'll find me here, at this same dock, arms outstretched, waiting, just waiting."

The bell rang.

"All ashore!  All ashore!"

He bent low.  His mouth met hers in one deep, lingering kiss.

"God bless you, darling."

"Good-bye, Ken, good-bye."

The next thing she knew she was back on the dock among a crowd of spectators waving hats and handkerchiefs--the women weeping, the men shouting and gesticulating.

The passengers stood at the rail, waving frantic adieux in return.  The siren sounded deep-toned blasts of warning to the smaller river craft to get out of the way.  The huge vessel strained and trembled, vibrating more violently as she gradually began to glide into the open. Assisted by a fleet of energetic tugs she finally swung clear and pointed her nose eastward.  Slowly, majestically, the leviathan moved out to sea.

It was bad enough to see him go at all, but to have him sail on such a gloomy day as this, with not a ray of sunshine to cheer him on the way, was more than Helen could bear.  Blinded by tears she stood kissing her hand to the familiar figure now only faintly discernible on the fast receding steamship, and she stood there long after every one else had left the dock watching until the _Mauretania_ was only a speck in the horizon.