CHAPTER XLII

THE ANTI-CHRISTIANS?


In England, when war came, the confusion was unbelievable. All that Gard had seen, heard, gone through in Deutschland proved the awfulness of the Force flung against Europe which had stupidly considered itself civilized.

He was burning to enlist. But what a chagrin to find his services not wanted! The only satisfaction he could get lay in the suggestion to wait. The more he was put off, the more he was bent on reaching the firing line.

In his enforced and impatient idleness he took out his German note book and began writing letters to Rebner in America, thus giving partial vent to his own feelings. The following brief extracts were written first as he went about different camps, offering himself, then at the front:

    _England, October, 1914._

    ... You know how I went to Germany at your urging, with every     favorable impulse toward the Germans. But you had little idea     what they are. If our fellow-Americans realized what was thought     and said of them beyond the Rhine, they would be in battle now.

    As there is no prospect of our Government wanting fighting men,     I am trying to get into the English service. No success yet....

    How could you, my good mentor, be so in error about the race     from which you sprang? Had you been in Germany, the scales would     have dropped from your eyes. You have never lived with the     Germans there--only read the best about the "most advanced" of     mankind. They are so different from our American-Germans. You     did not know that the educated Teuton at home is apt to be dirty     in his person and habits, eats with his knife, walks before     women, kicks his children about, has coarse or vulgar ideas on     female chastity, enjoys the obscene, has no good words to say of     anyone beyond his boundaries.

    Pray do not fancy I am pretending to chide _you_. Weren't we all     like you in America, dazzled before what apparently we were     humbly ready to admit as the super-race? And yet in a multitude     of ways it is so obviously a people set off by itself in much     barbarism. There is its Gothic script which offends the eye     somewhat like outlandish runes. Its very language growls and     snorts at you, sounds threatening as if angry--pardon me for     these sentences! There are its mud-colored towns and     architecture, its rude life, rough skinned, hairy, ferocious,     with tastelessness prevailing.

    The German imagination is never shot through with clear, happy     sunshine. The German emotions are distinctively expressed by     thumpings in some form. The Teuton's inability to see himself as     another sees him--is this not, above all, the stamp of an     under-civilized people?...

       *       *       *       *       *

    _England, October, 1914._

    ... Do not think I am unduly harsh, prejudiced, revengeful. I am     trying to write in measured terms of what has been forced in     upon me and my attention against my wish or expectations.

    I have met but one American who said that war was at hand and     knew what the Germans really are at home. He was an elderly     journalist in Dresden who was jeered at until he almost imagined     himself mentally unbalanced. Others thought him so, at any rate.

    But Anderson was a true prophet. Dear isolated, desolated soul!     I wonder where he is now. I wonder if he got out safely. How I     wish I could grasp his hand and say, How wise were your     convictions!

    Like myself he had gone to Deutschland to admire and love the     Germans. But he found what I found--an astonishing amount of     ruthlessness. How could one expect that the ultimate     world-justice and world-humanity were to evolve out of a race to     which the army, armed soldiers and statesmen clad in steel,     stand for so much?

    How could anything of universal good come from a people who     consider nothing from the viewpoint of a kindly common     brotherhood? Contempt, intolerance, physical force, are what     they gloat over in international relations. I discovered that     when they must ask pardon or make amends, they do so with bad     grace. They do not take a magnanimous and frank satisfaction or     pleasure in righting a wrong.

    You would not believe how lacking their character is in the     capacity for penitence, for atonement. We will never see them     sorry for any of their present enormities. The still, small     voice in them has not been allowed to develop. Their notion of     ethics is so different that it is inadmissible from our     standards.

    To be sensitive, grieve, suffer morally, is apart from their     normal consciousness. For all this tender and beautiful side of     human nature they substitute only the discomforted feelings of     defeat. No matter how this present conflict ends, he who looks     for any sympathetic actions or noble regrets from them will be     dumfounded....

       *       *       *       *       *

    _England, November, 1914_.

    Hurrah! I am at last, after disappointments and frettings, under     way for Flanders. Lo, I am become, as it were, an Englishman!     The British now see the full peril and are taking almost any     kind of men, and I'm going along. I suppose it is because I am     so keyed up that I feel so well. I'm surprised at myself. I     guess I must have, after all, a little good Anglo-Saxon grit in     me.

    I am trying to write this scrawl to you on a round milk     container in a camp near London. We are not permitted to tell     where....

    As I was on the point of saying in my last letter, Jesus is     never a watchword in Germany. The Nazarene meekness makes small     appeal there. All is Gott. The Teuton regards Christ as too much     of a weakling. Had He an army? Could He shoot, as all Germans     can? He would not fight and therefore was properly destroyed.     If His foolish ideas were followed, the weak would eventually     rule the earth whereas, to the German mind, the strong should     manifestly rule the earth. The strongest are the fittest, and     the fittest should alone survive.

    To the Goth the Christian religion and philosophy are baneful,     baleful. As the result of their feeble policy was not Christ     followed--the Germans claim--by the Dark Ages when mankind was     obsessed by His superstitious worship? Lifting men out of this     morass, the proper practical, scientific and warlike forces came     at length into play and we have the magnificent modern régime     whose basis is armed strength.

    Hence--it is argued--Germany came into her own and inevitably     leads the world. She represents the perfection of organized     physical and mental powers which are the antitheses of the     Christ ideal.

    And so you never hear much in Deutschland about Peace and Good     Will, Do as You would be Done by, Faith, Hope and Charity and     the greatest of these is Charity. Such Christian texts and     mottoes, which fill our American homes, churches and public     places, are little in evidence in Germany because they do not     enter into the life. The popular nomenclature is pagan rather     than Biblical. Already in this war we behold the Kaiser drawing     his names for forts and trenches from his wild pagan mythology,     not from Christian sources. And in Deutschland, acts in the     field count for so much more than words in the pulpit.

    If the Huns win, Teuton hate will, of course, succeed Christian     love as the human creed. Friendship, as we know it, will largely     cease to exist. Friends will be those who can be cowed into     truculence or bought. There will be no truth, justice, equity,     in our meaning. Only the will or whim of the Emperor. His State     Church, with its worship of Him, will grow as _the_ church.

    Everything that southern and western Europe stands for, from     ancient Greece to the northern points of Scotland and Ireland     (with America in addition)--beauty, loveableness, the     brightness of life with its joyousness, gayety, grace,     charm--will be stamped down under the metallic heels of the     Kaiser's battalions and bureaucrats....

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Boulogne, January, 1915_.

    After what I have written you from Germany, and since, about my     unexpected disillusionment, you will ask me:

    "Well, enough of this. What ought to be done or can be done     about it?"

    I am thinking about a solution. Not original, for its framework     was suggested by my old journalistic friend. I will send you an     outline of his idea as he gave it to me one day. All that he     said and prophesied has come so direfully true that I have now     full faith and confidence in his vision and practical sense on     the subject of the Goth race. For he _lived_ and observed among     them seven years.

    That's the great point--_living together_. And I do not mean     living together when people are mature or old but when     _young_--when minds, sympathies, etc., are plastic and pliable.     As long as the young Germans are kept home--never sent abroad     unless as spies in some form--the Teutons will remain Huns.

    Granted that they can't help it if they are born with the Hun     strain in their blood which their education or instruction not     only preserves but enrages. Admit that they want any barbarism     eliminated from their veins. That would be an important point     over which our world should hold out to them the glad hand....

    Don't be offended, but the best thing that I learned in college     was to throw well from left field. At any rate it saved my life,     I suppose, at Aix. And I've grown wonderfully fond of pepper. It     braces a chap for this Iceland wind that howls down upon us at     times. We call baseball and football a part of education. Good,     brave things. The Germans don't have them because they have only     "instruction."

    From what I observed beyond the Rhine, education is a growth in     free and liberal countries. As we are seeing in the war, German     instruction turns out experts, but also intellectual monsters     and scientific fiends--instructed heathens....

    Strange to say, I don't believe I could have stood this     existence here if my system had not got a good cleansing out     when I was sick. I am all the time thinking about the Huns. And     it is strictly necessary hereabouts.