CHAPTER XLIII

THE TEUTON PROBLEM. A SOLUTION


    _Flanders, a Mudhole, February, 1915._

    ... Is not my old friend Anderson's plan the only natural,     practical, efficient method by which to humanize their barbarous     instincts? Assuming that they will be defeated, as they _must_     be, the Anderson project, as you see, is that a permanent     arrangement must be offered them, and if necessary enforced upon     them, whereby a multitude of young German men and women shall be     sent yearly to foreign democratic lands to _live_ and be     educated there for a period. By attractive scholarships, by     pecuniary inducements or by any of a number of programmes, young     Germans can be tempted to this step. In living and studying,     before middle age, under free and liberal conditions, they will     begin looking at foreigners in a friendly, or what we should     call a Christian, manner. After awhile, after generations     perhaps, this leaven will work in the thick, tough, sour Teuton     dough. It will transform the people. They will gradually become     allies at heart instead of remaining hostiles.

    As it is now, the German eats, drinks, bathes, and nauseatingly     does other elemental things much as he did a hundred years ago,     because he receives his instruction in his homeland with the     idea, not only complacent but aggressive, that his habits are     the best. And this is for the reason that he has seen no other     kind when young. Do you think, for instance, that a youthful     German, after living in the freedom of our young sexes, would     return to the Rhine and long be content with the iron-like     Teuton customs in love, courtship and marriage?

    A youthful person is apt to admire the people among whom he is     staying a long while for the reason that, under such     circumstances, aliens are kind. He will always take pride in     these foreign connections, pride in what he has learned abroad.     He will think himself more fortunate and more advanced than his     fellow stay-at-homes. The young German, becoming used to more     amiable modes of existence, would naturally become more or less     fond of them. A broader, more human social spirit--the true     social spirit--would get a hold in him.

    I would go further than my friend Anderson. I would have _all_     civilized countries adopt this plan with one another as well as     with Germany. The trouble with civilization, as seen in this     war, is that no people understands or truly sympathizes with any     foreign nation--not even among the Allies. They are strangers     because they have been kept strangers. This creates suspicion,     envy, enmity, for they have not in any noticeable degree lived     together. They do not know one another's customs, habits,     perspectives. As a result, armies, navies, tariffs, treaties     backed by force, are necessary to hold civilization precariously     in shape--and at what colossal effort, anxiety, expense? The     different languages, literatures, arts, educations, religions,     should become familiar to large numbers in each race and be the     open, peaceful highways back and forth instead of, as now,     barriers.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Flanders, another Mudhole, February, 1915._

    ... I see the woeful, tragic need for this international     co-education all around us here at the front. The Canadians,     Australians, English, French, all quarreling back and forth and     pulling against one another as unfriendly strangers.

    Germany is giving--has given--one great lesson to them all and     to us Americans at home. And that is, IN UNION THERE IS     STRENGTH.

    After this war the tremendous question before the world will be:

    _How are we going to live with the Germans?--how get on with     them?_

    The only true and gracious solution I can see is--_To associate     and study together when young_! Would not you--would not     everyone--agree that this interchange in education, which would     not be very troublesome or expensive, is a true manner in which     to remove from the German make-up its savage, destructive animus     toward mankind? In order really to change a race, the work must     be done from the inside outward. And this means _some_ form of     education, not merely victories, edicts, Leagues.

    Let or make the Teutons be associated with gentler cultures than     their own. What if it does take a hundred, two hundred, years!     What is that compared with having the German problem and menace     unsolved in the future as in the past?

    Such young German missionaries year after year, as I have     indicated, would be bringing back something of sweetness and     light to their stubborn, irascible folk. The powerful and     exacerbated bias of this folk toward the _echt Deutsch_ would be     neutralized and mollified under the contact of its youths with     dispositions making for kindliness and courtesy. Confessedly the     stoutest race prejudices lie with those who have never stepped     outside their own boundaries.

    It is true this plan, in a small way, was tried under the     exchange of professors scheme. But the Kaiser won out in that     because his professors were too old and, it develops, were     simply his emissaries with hostile inclinations and intent. It     would appear that most of the young Americans who are partly     educated in Germany are pro-German. Had they gone to England or     France, they would be pro-British or pro-French.

    It is now being shown that the German's education or instruction     does not do away with the Hun element in him. The logical thing,     then, is to try foreign education on him. He needs to learn in     other countries, and to _live out_, their meanings of good faith     and a give-and-take, manly spirit. For he at present considers     it right to have no respect for his own spoken word to     foreigners, or even his written word.

    This is his old habit of the tribal fanatic. To lie to, to     cheat, to steal from, to kill, aliens is no admitted sin in the     moral decalogue of the Germans when an advantage can be derived.     Murder, senseless destruction, violation of women, obscenity, do     not therefore horrify them. If you as a foreigner strike the     metallic shield of their character, no resounding ringing of     what we know as conscience is heard, because extreme erudition     in Germany largely takes the place of moral feelings. "Science     without con_science_ is the death of man." And the women and     State religion are as Hunnish as the males. All these influences     make for war.

    This conscienceless dullness, or immense hollowness, in the     Teuton people always suggests to me an eggshell encased in the     pomp of steel. Should they be defeated, I feel that the nation     may cave in tremendously, horribly. How can it be otherwise with     a race that never sees anything foolish in itself, and     exaggerates the core of its costly army and bureaucracy at the     expense of the kernel?

    By living abroad a part of their study years the young Germans     would little by little come to prefer to substitute amity for     armaments, confident trust for suspicion, love as a motto     instead of hate. For they would see that other peoples are     worthy to live. They would learn more chivalry toward women and     children, the beautiful significance of humanity and of     universal brotherhood. They would learn that what they call     weakness desirably lends delicacy, tenderness, spiritual and     moral loveliness to existence which the coarse bigness and     bow-wowness of the German ideal itself will never attain....

When March came, and the birds flew back to find no trees, no grass, no flowers, Gard Kirtley, in his spring-time of life, stepped out from his dugout in Flanders with a gun, and faced the Huns of the northeast. He was prepared to greet Death which is the fruit of old age but which in youth appears as with a crown of laurel.