HOMEWARD BOUND.

It was about an hour later when, as they were passing through a particularly thick bit of woods, Lucky spoke softly to Bob, who was striding close by his side.

"You drive heem leetle while?"

"Sure."

"Injun go back leetle piece.  Want see any them breed follow."

"All right, but you be careful now."

"Oui.  Injun be ver' careful."

Jack was walking some distance ahead of the team and it was a half hour later when he glanced back and missed the Indian.

"Where's Lucky?" he asked after waiting for the team to catch up with him.

Bob told him where the Indian had gone and for what purpose and Jack agreed that it was a wise move but added:

"He ought to be catching up with us pretty soon don't you think?"

"I'm giving him an hour and he's only been gone about half that time."

"I imagine he can take care of himself," Mr. Lakewood added.

"He can if anyone can," Jack agreed.  "But you've got to remember that, if they're all following us it's six to one."

"But the one is armed," Bob reminded him.

"I know but how do you know that they might not have found a gun or two?"

"Who's hanging crepe now?" Bob asked.

"I'm not, only we don't want to take too much for granted, not this trip we don't."

Since the Indian had turned back Bob had permitted the dogs to gradually lessen their pace as he did not wish to get too far ahead and, for the past few minutes they had been moving at a slow walk.

"Think we'd better wait here?" he asked.

"I would," Jack replied.  "You see, if he doesn't show up soon we'll have to go back and see what's happened to him and the farther we go on the farther we'll have to go back," he explained.

Bob at once ordered the dogs to halt and the willingness with which they obeyed the word showed that they were far from rested.  There was probably no stronger team in the state, but they had a heavy load and for several hours Lucky had urged them on at a rapid pace so it was not surprising that they were tired.

Another half hour passed and they were on the point of turning back when, without warning, the Indian stood before them.

"Gee, but I'm glad you're back," Jack declared.

"We were beginning to think you had been captured," Bob added.

"Injun no geet caught."

"But did you see any of the breeds?" Bob asked.

"Non, no see um."

"Then I guess they decided to take my advice."

"Oui, I t'ink so.  Injun go back three, four mile, no see um."

"Then you think we're safe as far as they are concerned?" Mr. Lakewood asked.

"Oui, I t'ink so."

They traveled at a slow pace until noon when they stopped to cook dinner and to give the dogs a couple of hours rest, and at four o'clock Lucky announced that they would make camp for the night.

"We come seexty mile an' dog heem heap tired," he said.

"And they've got nothing on me at that," Jack told him.

"Same here," Bob added.

"And I haven't walked a foot of the way," their uncle complained.

"No mind that," Lucky told him.  "You geet walk 'nough time we heet Nome."

Seven o'clock found them ready to turn in with the exception of Bob who was to stand the first watch.  They had decided to divide the night into three watches of four hours each and Bob was to take the first.  Mr. Lakewood had insisted on taking his turn but the others had ruled him down, declaring that he needed the sleep and rest and finally he had reluctantly given in.

"But beginning tomorrow I want it distinctly understood that I'm going to do my share of the work," he told them.

At eleven o'clock Bob called the Indian, who was to take the second watch and reported that nothing had happened.  His watch also passed without incident as did Jack's and seven o'clock found them once more on the trail all, including the dogs, well rested and in high spirits.

If was about two o'clock when Jack, who was some distance ahead and out of sight of the others because of a clump of bushes, suddenly appeared running back.

"What's up?" Bob asked aware that something had happened.

"There's a dog team coming this way," he told them.

"How far away?"

"Must be nearly a mile.  There's a big open space just ahead and he's about half way cross it."

"How many men did you see?"

"Only one."

"Then it must be Long."

"That's what I think."

"What'll we do?" Bob asked turning to Lucky.

"We go 'long, meet heem in open."

"But I'd better keep out of sight," Mr. Lakewood proposed.

"Oui, that bon plan.  You geet on sled an' cover all up an' heem no see you till we geet ready," Lucky agreed.

Mr. Lakewood had refused to ride except at short intervals where the going had been exceptionally good, but now he quickly took off the extra pair of snow-shoes and got on the sled, and the Indian covered him up with a blanket so that one would never have suspected that the sled bore human freight.

"You breathe all right?"

"Sure."

"Then we go.  Mush."

As they swept out into the open space they saw the other team coming at a rapid pace and not more than a quarter of a mile away.

"That Long," Lucky assured them.

"Hello, Lucky, what you doing up here?" Long sang out as soon as he was in easy speaking distance.

"We on trip," the Indian told him.

"Where you been?" was the next question, and it was plain that he was much disturbed in his mind at meeting them.

"Up nor'."

"How far?"

"Some way."

"Did you see my gang of breeds?"

"Oui."

"Hope they treated you all right."

"Oui."

"That's good.  But, tell me, what are you up here for?"

"We come hunt for man."

"Whatman?"

"Heem name Lakewood.  Deese boy heem nephew."

"You mean Silas Lakewood?"

"Oui."

"But he started back for Nome more'n six weeks ago.  You knew he came with me, didn't you?"

"Oui."

"We came on a prospecting trip, but we didn't find a thing and he got cold feet.  I wanted him to keep on with me up to my trapping camp, but he wouldn't do it and so I had to let him go.  He ought to have got back to Nome long before you left."

The man was trying his best to put a lot of concern into his voice.

"Heem no geet thar."

"Well, I'm sorry to hear it but, after all, it's none of my business."

"I think it is."

The words came in a loud tone from the sled as Mr. Lakewood threw the blanket off and got to his feet.

"You!"

"Yes, it is I."

"But how--how--"

"Never mind how," Mr. Lakewood interrupted.  "I'm here and do you know what I'm going to do to you?"

"No, but seeing it's four to one, I suppose you'll take me back and file a complaint against me."

"And that's where you're wrong.  Bob," he said turning to the boy, "cover him with your gun.  Now, Jack, you frisk him," he ordered as soon as Bob had obeyed.  "Now you can put up your gun," he added after Jack had taken two revolvers from the man's belt.  "Long, you struck me once when I wasn't looking and in falling I hurt my back, a fact which put me in your power for a long time.  But the back's well now and I'm going to give you the sweetest licking you ever had in your life.  Then you can go your way and I'll go mine and the score will be settled."

The boys started to remonstrate, but their uncle stopped them.

"No, it's no use.  I never had much use for the law when it came to a thing of this sort and this is a pleasure I've been promising myself for a long time."

As he spoke he had removed his heavy coat and now he ordered Long to do the same.

"I give you my word of honor," he told him, "that this fight will be between you and me alone and if you get the best of me you can go on your way and I'll never take any action against you for what you've done to me."  Then, turning to Lucky and the boys, he ordered: "Don't one of you interfere whatever happens."

"Heem one--what you call--game sport," Lucky whispered.

"I'll say he is," Bob and Jack both agreed.

Long was several inches taller than his opponent and the boys knew that his height would give him a big advantage especially in the deep snow.  But they were soon to learn that their fears were entirely without foundation.  The lanky trapper undoubtedly would have been able to give a good account of himself pitted against almost any one, but he was no match for Silas Lakewood.  Although nearing his fiftieth year he had always kept himself in the prime of condition and, as Jack after told Bob, what he did not know about boxing simply did not exist Three minutes after the contest started Long knew he was licked, but he had grit enough not to beg for mercy and he got none.

As Mr. Lakewood had promised the licking was thorough and most beautifully administered, as Jack put it, and when it was over one of Long's eyes was closed completely and his face was battered almost to a pulp, but he was not seriously injured.

"I didn't want to hurt him so that he couldn't travel," Mr. Lakewood explained as he drew on his coat.

"You sure do--what you call heem--one bon job," Lucky declared.

As for Long, he stood by his sled slowly wiping the blood from his face.  "I hope you're satisfied," he grunted.

"I am, perfectly and, so far as I am concerned, the incident is closed."

"And you'll not take action against me?"

"I reckon I've taken action enough," he smiled.  "No, I'll never bother you if you keep away from me."

"Can I have my guns back?"

"No.  And we're going to see if you have a rifle and if you have we're going to take that too."

"But--"

"No buts about it.  I don't trust you not for a minute and we're not going to take any chances.  You may as well know that we have all the guns of your friends which probably explains why they are not following us.  And for that matter they may be and we figure that should you meet up with them and had a gun you'd be too dangerous. No, we'll leave the guns at Pete's store when we get back and you can get them any time."

Long made no further remonstrance and they searched his sled finding a rifle which they added to the others beneath their pack.

"So long," Mr. Lakewood cried as Lucky started his team.

But Long, who had already started made no reply.

"I guess he's sore," he chuckled.

"His face must be anyhow," Bob laughed.

"Gee, but you did it easy," Jack declared as he looked at his uncle with admiration in his eyes.

"And I'll bet my old hat you both thought I'd get licked," he laughed.

"Well, you see, he's so much taller than you," Bob said apologetically.

"But size doesn't always count, you know."

"Don't we?" Jack laughed

"When we get back you'll have to teach me some of those blows," Bob said.  "I thought I knew something about boxing, but after seeing you the conceit is all knocked out of me."

"I'll teach you all I know gladly," his uncle promised and added: "and when I get time I'll tell you how I just missed being a prize fighter."

It was shortly after dark one afternoon about ten days later that Lucky halted his team in front of Pete Slinger's store in Nome.  They had made the return trip without noteworthy event.  Long's gang of breeds as well as the man himself, evidently having decided to let well enough alone.

As they entered the store, Pete came from the office to meet them but, as he was at the same time, reading a book he did not see who it was until he was close to them.

"Well, begorra, an' it's yerselves, so it is an' ut sure is a sight fer sore eyes ter see yer.  An' yer found yer uncle, eh?" he added as he caught sight of Mr. Lakewood who entered the store last.

"We sure did," Bob laughed as he grasped the man's hand.  "You know him don't you?"

"Sure.  It's meself as knows him.  An' now tell us all about ut."

"But where can I leave these things?" Mr. Lakewood asked as he dumped an armful of rifles and revolvers on the counter.

"Fer the luv of Mike, whar did yer pick up the arsenal?" Pete gasped as he shook hands with Mr. Lakewood.

"That's a part uv the story," Mr. Lakewood smiled.  "When you get time we'll be glad to tell you all about it."

"Whin I git time, eh.  Sure an' it's meself as would like ter ask why I haven't got time right now," and, striding to the door, he turned the key in the lock and led the way back to the office saying: "This store is closed fer business till I get that story."

The story was soon told and when Bob, who, at Mr. Lakewood's request, had acted as story teller for the party, had finished, Pete burst but with:

"Sure an' it's meself as knew thot man Long was a bad one but I niver thot as how he was thot bad.  I told yer not ter go up thar wid him yer remember."

"Yes, I know you did," Mr. Lakewood assured him.

"Oh, but it's meself as would have liked ter have seen thot fight."

"You missed a good one let me tell you," Jack told him.

"And how soon can we get a boat for Seattle?" Bob asked a few minutes later.

"Cap'n Dick got in two days ago an' I reckon he'll be goin' out aboot day after ter-morrow an' it's barely possible he'll let yer go along," Pete grinned.

They found Captain Blake on board his ship an hour later and the reunion between the friends was warm indeed.  The captain confirmed Pete's statement that he would sail the next day but one and assured them that he would be most happy to have them as passengers.

"We ought to get to the ranch in time for Christmas," Jack declared.

"Sure you will if we have a fair trip down the coast," the captain assured them.  "But have you wired your father?"

"What do you know about that?" Bob asked.  "Never thought of it, but I'll go right up town and attend to it."

Two days later, after an affectionate parting with Lucky, who, in spite of his protests was obliged to accept a handsome present in addition to his wages, from Mr. Lakewood and the boys, they sailed out of the harbor just as the sun was peeping over the edge of the ocean.

"We'll have to come up here again sometime," Jack declared as he stood leaning on the rail for a last hand wave to Pete Slinger who was waving them good bye from the wharf.

"Maybe we will sometime," Bob said as he too waved good bye.



THE END.