THE BOYS START AGAIN FOR ALASKA.

"Well, we're off again."

It was two days after they had left the log cabin by the sea and the steamer, on which they had, for the second time, engaged passage, was drawing slowly away from the wharf.

"And here's hoping we have better luck than last time," Bob returned and he leaned over the rail.  "But I might as well confess that I feel a bit squeemish."

"But lightning never strikes twice in the same place you know," Jack laughed.

"And, by the same token, I don't suppose we're likely to hit that same derelict but there are others, you know," Bob smiled back.

"I know, but let's not borrow trouble."

"Pardon me, but are you Bob and Jack Lakewood?"

The boys turned quickly at the question and were much surprised to see the captain of the ship standing before them.

"Yes, sir."

Both boys answered at the same time.

"I thought so," the captain smiled, holding out both hands which the boys, although greatly puzzled, were quick to grasp.  "I am Richard Blake and, as you have probably noted by my uniform, have the honor to command this ship."

"Yes, we noticed it," Jack said as the captain paused.

"But you probably do not know that the man you saved is my brother."

"No, sir, we did not.  He told us that his name was Blake and that he had a brother who was also a captain, but you do not look like him." Bob smiled.

"That's true," the captain smiled back.  "Frank is light and small while I am dark and rather above the average in size, but he's my brother just the same and more than that he's the best brother a man ever had."

"I can easily believe that, sir," Bob began and then stopped short. "No, I don't either," he corrected.  "Make it as good a brother as a man ever had and I won't say a word, but he can't be any better than the one I've got."

The captain again reached out his hand and, as soon as Bob had grasped if, said:

"That's one of the finest things I ever heard, and I'll accept the suggestion.  Son," he added turning to Jack whose face was flushed, "you also have a good brother so we might as well make it a trio."

"All I've got to say is that if you've got as good a brother as I have you've got as good as they make," Jack grinned.

"I'm not going to try to thank you," the captain continued after a moment's pause and both boys noticed that his eyes were dim with tears.  "There are some things which are beyond thanks and--and I know you know how I feel."

"Indeed we do, sir," Jack assured him.

"But, during this trip you are my guests.  I have already arranged for you to sit at my table."

"That's very good of you, sir, and we certainly do appreciate it," Bob assured him.

"But please don't tell anyone about it," Jack begged.

"I won't," the captain smiled.

But in some way or other the truth leaked out and before the trip was a day old they, much to their disgust, found themselves regarded as heroes by crew and passengers alike.  But, in spite of it, the trip proved most enjoyable.  The weather was perfect and the captain seemed to take great delight in showing them the different parts of the ship and in answering their many questions.  They, in turn, took him into their confidence as to the object of their journey and he expressed great surprise that their lather had sent them on such a mission.

"Alaska is a mighty big place," he told them, "and in the winter it's a very rough place let me tell you."

"You think it's dangerous: the trip up the Yukon, I mean?" Bob asked him.

"Well, for you two boys to take such a trip at this time of the year would be decidedly dangerous, not to say foolhardy, but if you get a good native to go with you the risk will, of course, be much less."

"And do you think we can get one?"

"I guess there's little doubt about that provided you can afford it. They charge a pretty stiff price these days."

"I'm sure father would want us to have a guide and will be willing to pay whatever is right."

"Then by all means do it."

"Do you know of a man we can get?"

"Not personally, but I know a fellow up there who will know where to get the right man and I'll attend to it."

"That's very good of you, and--"

"Good nothing," the captain interrupted.  "You forget what I owe you two boys."

It was late in the afternoon when, a few days later, the ship steamed up to her wharf at Nome.

"My, it's quite some city," Jack declared as he stood with Bob and the captain in the pilot house.

"Largest in Alaska," the captain assured them.

"What's the population?" Bob asked.

"It was about 2,600 the last census and I guess it hasn't changed much since."

The captain had invited them to remain on board as his guests while the ship remained in port instead of going to a hotel and they had been glad to accept the invitation.

"The ship will be here for three days and I won't have much to do so we can put in the time together getting your outfit in shape," he told them.

"That'll be fine if you can spare the time," Bob assured him.

"It'll keep me out of mischief," the man laughed.

"But don't you think it would be a good idea to see if we can find someone who knew my uncle?  You see he was here for several weeks and he must have gotten acquainted with somebody who would know something about where he started for," Jack suggested.

"Of course, and I think I can name the very man to go to.  If he got well acquainted with anyone here the chances are a hundred to one that it was Pete Slinger.  Pete's a character, but a good reliable man all the same.  I don't believe there's a man, woman or child in Nome that doesn't know Pete well enough to call him by his first name and as for Pete--well, he can tell you the life history of about everyone who has spent upwards of two days in Nome during the past ten years."

"Is he Irish?" Bob asked.

"Irish and French."

"What does he do?" Jack asked.

"Keeps a store and sells everything from tooth picks to second hand pulpits."

"He ought to do some business," Bob remarked.

"He does.  He looks like a tramp, but I guess there's little doubt, but that he's a got a good sized roll laid up against a rainy day. We'll go and see him right after supper tonight."

As the three friends walked up the main street of the town that night the boys were much surprised to find that it differed but little from towns with which they were familiar in the northern part of Maine. Except for an occasional Esquimo the people also seemed much the same being largely French Canadians with a liberal sprinkling of Americans.

"Gee, I expected to see polar bears running about the streets," Jack laughed.

"And reindeer pulling the pungs I suppose," the captain added.

"Sure thing," Jack assured him whereat they all laughed.

"Well, here we are," the captain said as they stopped in front of one of the largest buildings on the street.  "This is Pete's place."

There were several men and two or three women in the store as they entered, but no sooner did the proprietor catch sight of the captain than he dropped a sugar scoop back in the barrel and, pushing his customers right and left, came rushing up.

"Faith an' yer a sight fer sore eyes so yer be," he cried as he grasped the captain's hands in both of his.

"And, believe me, I'm glad to see you again," the captain laughed. "But I want you to meet my two friends, Bob and Jack Lakewood."

The Irishman, a small man standing not over five feet two or three inches and weighing less than a hundred and twenty pounds, looked at the two boys for a full minute before speaking.

"Don't be after tellin' me thot they're the byes what saved Frank," he said at last.

"But they are," the captain assured him.

Without a word the small man threw his arms about Bob's neck and gave him a hearty hug at the same time kissing him on both cheeks.  Then, releasing him he gave Jack the same treatment.

"The store's yer's, the house's yer's, bless me heart the whale blamed town's yer's, yes wid all uv Canada throwed in," he cried. Then turning to the people who were standing looking wonderingly on, he shouted: "Did yer hear ut?  These be the byes whot saved Cap'n Frank whin his ship went down.  What yer standin' thar fer loike a lot uv dummies?  Come up here forninst and shake hands wid 'em ivery mother's son uv yer."

The people needed no second invitation and in another moment the boys were busy shaking hands and murmuring their thanks.

"Now git out uv here all uv yees an' let me talk wid me friends," the storekeeper ordered and the boys were amazed at the meekness and celerity with which the order was obeyed.

"Don't let us interfere with your business," Bob said.

"Interfere nuttin'.  They'll all be back inside an hour," the man assured him as he led the way back to one corner of the store which was fitted up as an office.  "Sit down wid yer an' tell me all about it," he ordered.

Bob gave him an account of the wreck keeping himself and Jack out of it as much as he could and when he had finished the storekeeper turned to Captain Blake and said:

"'Tis modest they are as well as brave an' thot's a mighty good combination let me tell yer.  I've heard uv thim Canucks down toward Seattle whot took Frank an' the byes in but I've niver seen 'em. Believe me, they're goin' ter git a good presint from old Pete. Can't yer see I'm busy the minute?"  This last was shouted at a man who had just come in the store and was noisily drumming on the counter in an effort to attract attention.  Without a word he turned and went out.

"You've sure got your customers well trained, Pete," the captain smiled.

"They know better'n ter fool wid me," Pete grinned.  "Jerry's sick wid a bad cold an' it laves me all alone in the store," he explained. "By the way," he added as though with a sudden thought, "I wonder if you bye's are related iny ter a man what was here a few weeks ago.. His name was the same as yourn, front name was Silas, Silas Lakewood."

"He is our uncle," Bob told him.  "And we've come up here to find him.  Did you know him?"

"I did thot.  He used ter come in a lot an' chin wid me an' a mighty interstin' chinner he was too, let me tell yer.  Guess he'd bin about all over the world."

"Yes, Uncle Silas was a great traveler and the funny part of it is that we've never seen him."

"Is thot so?  It do seem strange.  He's a kinder queer loike feller too: didn't seem half the time ter know jest what he did want, but allys seemed ter be wantin' sumpin'."

"Did you know he was going up the Yukon with a man by the name of Long?" Bob asked anxiously.

"Yep, he told me all about it a few days afore he left an' I did all I could ter keep him from goin'."

"Why was that?"

"Cause I didn't trust thot man, Long, what was a goin' wid him, not none I didn't.  But his mind was made up and thar was no sech thing as changin' him.  He thought Long was all thot he made hisself out ter be an' yer couldn't say a word agin him."

"But do you know where they were going?  He wrote father that they would be gone only a month."

"An' he told me the same thing an' here he's been gone, let me see, it must be most three months.  He told me thot they were goin' up the Yukon as fer as whar the Koynkuk empties inter it an' thin they were goin' ter follow thot river up a piece, but he didn't say jest how fer."

"How far is the Koynkuk from here?" Bob asked,

"Matter uv 250 or 300 miles more or less."

"And he only expected to take a month for the trip.  It seems to me that that wouldn't leave them much time to prospect after they got up there."

"Jest whot I told him, but he said Long said they could do ut in thot time an' he sure did trust thot man worse luck."

"What's the score against Long?" Captain Blake asked.

"I dunno thar's anything agin him thot yer could lay yer finger on, but he's kinder slippery loike an eel an' I niver did cotton ter him. He may be all right, but I'm bettin' he ain't."

"Did they take a good store of supplies with them?" Jack asked.

"'Bout enough fer a month I should say."

"Well, Pete," Captain Blake said after a short pause, "the boys want to go after him and it's up to you to get them a good guide, a man you can trust."

"Sure an' it's meself as knows jest the man if he's at home.  I haven't seen him fer two or three days, but he's prob'ly round somewhars.  Yer sit here a minute an' I'll find out."

Pete left the store by the front door and was gone about ten minutes.

"Lucky Hogan'll be here in a few minutes," he announced when he returned.  "He's in town an' it's three men I sent ter find him."

"He's Irish?" Captain Blake asked.

Pete laughed.  "Thot's the funny part uv it.  Thar's not a drop uv Irish blood in him: he's pure Injun: a full blooded Crow."

"Then that isn't his real name?"

"I dunno.  S'pose not, but it's what iveryone calls him."

"He's reliable?"

"Yer don't s'pose I'd sent fer him if he wasn't do yer?" Pete replied a bit nettled.

"Of course not," the captain hastened to assure him.  "I just asked the question without thinking."

"I'd trust Lucky wid me own life an' so would anyone else what knows him," Pete affirmed.

"And you think he'll go?" Bob asked.

"Sure, but yer'll have ter pay him five dollars a day.

"We'll be glad to," Bob assured him.

"Why do they call him Lucky?" Jack asked.

"I dunno.  He niver's had iny great luck not's fer's I know."

"I suppose you can fit them out all right, Pete?" Captain Blake asked.

"Lave ut ter me.  Whin do you want ter start?" he asked, turning to Bob.

"Why, the sooner the better, I suppose.  Let's see, today's Friday. Do you think we could get off on Monday?"

"Nuthin' ter prevent fur's I can see."

"Is the Yukon froze over yet?" Jack asked.

"Sure it is wid five or six inches uv ice on it.  If it wasn't fer the snow yer could make foine time on skates, but thar's apt ter be a big snow storm iny time now."

"How cold do you boys think it is now?" the captain asked.

"Must be pretty near down to freezing," Jack replied.

Pete laughed.

"Did you notice the thermometer when you went out?" the captain asked.

"Ut was ten below."

"You mean below zero?" Jack asked doubtfully.

"Sure I do."

"Well, it doesn't seem possible.  It must be mighty dry up here.  It would seem colder than this at that temperature in Maine and it's pretty dry there."

"Wait till it gets fifty below thin yer'll know it's cold," Pete laughed.

"We've seen it forty below in Maine," Bob told him.

Just then the front door opened and a man stepped in and, after looking about for a moment, came over toward the office.  That he was an Indian there could be little doubt.  Tall and straight as an arrow his coal black hair and piercing black eyes gave to him a dignity which at once caught their attention.  At the same time there was that about the man which inspired trust and this they both felt instinctively.

"Sam say you want see Injun heap queek," he said as he stood before them.

"An' Sam said jest right, begorra.  Lucky, this is Cap'n Blake, you've prob'ly seen him, but yer niver saw these two byes afore an' I want yer should understand as how they're particular friends uv mine. They saved Cap'n Frank's life that's what they did."

Both boys had risen from their chairs as Pete started his introduction and now they both held out their hand with a smile.

"Injun heap glad know friends of Pete's an' Cap'n Frank, heem heap fine man.  Injun know heem long time.  Heem good to Injun."

"Now I remember hearing Frank speak of you," the captain said as he in turn shook the Indian's hand.  "It seems rather strange that I've never met you before."

"Cap'n Frank, your brother?" the Indian asked.

"Yes, but we don't look much alike."

"You heap bigger."

"And darker too," the captain added.

"Sot yerself, Lucky, an' it's meself as'll tell yer what we want," Pete said and explained the situation to him.  "You can go, eh?" he asked when he had finished.

"Oui, Injun go if Pete wants," he said without hesitation.

"I'd rather trust these byes ter you than ter iny man I know," Pete said and the boys could see that the Indian was pleased at the compliment although he tried not to show it.  "Your dogs in good shape?" he asked.

"They all right."

"Good.  Then you be ready ter start Monday morning."

"Injun be ready."

"I'll bet he's a fine fellow," Jack declared as soon as the Indian had left the store.

"Yer can tie ter him," Pete assured them.

"He inspires trust," Bob added.

"He sure deserves ut too."

"Well, Pete, we won't keep your trade away any longer," the captain said as he got up from his chair.

"Thar's no need ter hurry," Pete told them.

"Come on board and take dinner with us tomorrow," the captain invited.

"What time?"

"We dine at one o'clock."

"Faith an' I'll be thar wid bells on.  Have ter close up store, but thot don't matter iny."

"It is a bit cold," Jack said when they were half way back to the ship.

They had stopped at the telegraph office long enough to permit the boys to send a wire to their father telling of their safe arrival and that they had secured a good guide.

"What a man that storekeeper is," Bob remarked as they walked along.

"I told you he was a character," the captain smiled.

"And that Indian," Jack added.  "He may be a Crow, but here's betting that he's a man and a mighty good one."

"If Pete recommends a man you can bank on it that he's all right," the captain assured them.  "As I said awhile ago I remember hearing Frank speak of him as one of the most trustworthy Indians he had ever met."

"Then I reckon we'll be safe with him," Bob declared.

"As safe as you could be with anyone," the captain said soberly.