RED TAPE


AT ten o’clock the next morning, Hardin, entering the office, again the general manager’s, found there before him, George MacLean the new director, and Percy Babcock, the treasurer, who had been put in by the Overland Pacific when the old company was reorganized. They had just come in from Los Angeles, the trip made in MacLean’s private car.

“Where’s Estrada?” inquired Hardin of Ogilvie, who was making a great show of industry at the desk in the center of the room.

Before Ogilvie could open his deliberate lips, Hardin’s question was answered by Babcock, a thin nervous man, strung on live wires. “Not here yet.”

Hardin stood in his characteristic attitude, legs outstretched, his hands in his pockets. “Rickard?”

“Coming back, Ogilvie says. He went out a few minutes ago.”

“Just like Marshall, that.” Hardin moved over to the leather lounge where MacLean was sitting. Neither man answered him. It was Hardin’s method of acknowledging the situation.

Rickard entered a few minutes later, Estrada behind him. Ogilvie followed Rickard to his desk.

“Well?” inquired the new manager.

Ogilvie explained lengthily that he had the minutes of the last meeting.

“Leave them here.” Rickard waved him toward Estrada, who held out his hand for the papers.

Ogilvie’s grasp did not relax. He stammered: “There is no secretary. I’ve been taking the minutes--”

“Thank you. Mr. Estrada will read them. We do not need you, Mr. Ogilvie.”

Ogilvie stood, turning his expressionless eyes from one director to the other as if expecting that order to be countermanded. Babcock and MacLean appeared to be looking at something outside through the vine-framed windows. An ugly smile disfigured Hardin’s mouth.

Rickard spoke again. “Mr. Estrada! We won’t detain you any longer, Mr. Ogilvie.”

Reluctantly, the accountant relinquished the papers. His retreating coat tails looked ludicrously whipped, but no one laughed. Hardin’s scowl deepened.

“Showing his power,” he thought. “He’s going to call for a new pack.”

Estrada pushed the minutes through with but a few unimportant interruptions. He was sitting at the same desk with Rickard. Hardin, sensitive and sullen, thought he saw the meeting managed between them. “It’s all slated,” ran his angry blood. “The meeting’s a farce. It was all fixed in Los Angeles, or in Marshall’s office.” He whipped himself into rebellion. He was no baby. He knew about these matters better than these strangers, this fancy dude! He’d show them!

It took their silent cooperation to hold him down. It became more apparent to him that they were all pitted against him. He was being pressed against the wall.

Several times he attempted to bring the tangled affairs of the water companies before the directors. Rickard would not discuss the water companies.

“Because he’s not posted! He’s beginning to see what he’s up against,” ran Hardin’s stormy thoughts. He felt Rickard’s hand in this, although it was Estrada, apparently, who shelved the mystifications of the uneasy companies, their rights, their dissatisfactions and their lawsuits. Babcock seconded the Mexican’s motion to discuss those issues at the next meeting. “It is a put-up job,” sulked Tom Hardin.

He was on his feet the next minute with a motion to complete the Hardin head-gate. Violently he declaimed to Babcock and MacLean his wrongs, the injustice that had been done him. Marshall had let that fellow Maitland convince him that the gate was not practicable; had it not been for him, the gate would be in place now; all this time and money saved. And the Maitland dam, built instead! Where was it? Where was the money, the time, put in that little toy? Sickening! His face purpled over the memory. Why was he allowed to begin again with the gate? “Answer me that. Why was I allowed to begin again? It’s all child’s play, that’s what it is. And when I am in it again, up to my neck, he pulls me off.”

This was the real Hardin, the uncouth, overaged Lawrence student! The new manner was just a veneer. Rickard had been expecting it to wear thin.

“Why did we begin it, I ask you?” repeated Hardin, his face flushed and eager. “To make laughing-stocks of ourselves down here? That’s a costly game for the O. P. to play. What does Marshall know about conditions, sitting in his office, and looking at maps, and reading letters and reports from his spies? I’ll give you the answer: he wants the glory himself. Why did he tell me that he thought my gate would go, and then start another ten times as costly? He wants all the credit. He’d like to see my gate a failure. Why does he push the concrete gate ahead, and hold up mine every few days?”

“I think,” interjected Rickard, “that we all agree with Mr. Marshall, Mr. Hardin, that a wooden head-gate on silt foundation could never be more than a makeshift. I understood that the first day he visited the river with you he had the idea to put the ultimate gate, the gate which would control the water supply of the valley, up at the Crossing on rock foundation. Mr. Marshall does not expect to finish that in time to be of first use. He hopes the wooden gate will solve the immediate problem. It was a case of any port in a storm. He has asked me to report my opinion.”

“Why doesn’t he give me a chance to go ahead then?” growled the deposed manager. “Instead of letting the intake widen until it will be an impossibility to confine the river there at all?”

“So you do think that it will be an impossibility to complete the gate as planned?”

Hardin had run too fast. “I didn’t mean that,” he stammered. “I mean it will be difficult if we are delayed much longer.”

“You are in charge of the construction of that gate?”

Hardin said he was. If it had not been for the floods--

“Have you the force to re-begin work at once?” demanded Rickard.

“I had it,” evaded Hardin. “I had everything ready to go on--men, material--when we stopped the last time.”

“And you haven’t it now?”

Hardin hated to the soul of him to have to acknowledge that he had not; he shrank from uncovering a single obstacle that stood between his gate and completion. He tried to hedge. MacLean, a big man whose iron wheels moved slowly, was weighing the caliber of the two opposing men. Babcock, wiry, alert, embarrassed Hardin with his challenging stare.

“Answer my question, please.”

“I should have to assemble them again,” admitted Hardin sulkily.

Rickard consulted his note-book. “I think we’ve covered everything. Now, I want to propose the laying of a spur-track from Hamlin’s Junction to the Heading.” His manner cleared the stage of supernumeraries; this was the climax. Hardin looked ready to spring.

“And in connection with that, the development of a quarry in the granite hills back of Hamlin’s,” continued Rickard, not looking at Hardin.

Instantly Hardin was on his feet. His fist thundered on the table. “I shall oppose that,” he flared. “It is absolutely unnecessary. We can’t afford it. Do you know what that will cost, gentlemen?”

“One hundred thousand dollars!” Rickard interrupted him. “I want an appropriation this morning for that amount. It is, in my opinion, absolutely necessary if we are to save the valley. We can not afford not to do it, Mr. Hardin!”

Hardin glared at the other men for support; he found MacLean’s face a blank wall; Estrada looked uncomfortable. Babcock had pricked up his ears at the sound of the desired appropriation; his head on one side, he looked like an inquisitive terrier.

Hardin spread out his hands in helpless desperation. “You’ll ruin us,” he said. “It’s your money, the O. P.’s, but you’re lending it, not giving it to us. You are going to swamp the Desert Reclamation Company. We can’t throw funds away like that.” One hundred thousand dollars! Why, he could have stopped the river any time if he had had that sum; once a paltry thousand would have saved them--“I didn’t ask the O. P. to come in and ruin us, but to stop the river; not to throw money away in hog-wild fashion.” He was stammering inarticulately. “There’s no need of a spur-track if you rush my gate through.”

“_If_,” Rickard nodded. “Granted. If we can rush it through. But suppose it fails? Marshall said the railroad would stand for no contingencies. The interests at stake are too vital--”

“Interests!” cried Tom Hardin. “What do you know of the interest at stake? You or your railroad? Coming in at the eleventh hour, what can you know? Did you promise safety to thousands of families if they made their homes in this valley? Are you responsible? Did you get up this company, induce your friends to put their money in it, promise to see them through? What do you know of the interests at stake? You want to put one hundred thousand dollars into a frill. God, do you know what that means to _my_ company? It means ruin--” Estrada pulled him down in his seat.

Rickard explained to the directors the necessity in his opinion of the spur-track and the quarry. Rock in great quantities would be needed; cars must be rushed in to the break. He urged the importance of clenching the issue. “If it’s not won this time, it’s a lost cause,” he maintained. “If it cuts a deeper gorge, the Imperial Valley is a chimera; so is Laguna Dam.”

The other men were drawn into the argument. Babcock leaned toward Hardin’s conservatism. MacLean was judicial. Estrada upheld Rickard. The spur-track, in his opinion, was essential to success. Hardin could see the meeting managed between the newcomer and the Mexican, and his anger impotently raged. His temper made him incoherent. He could see Rickard, cool and impersonal, adding to his points, and MacLean slowly won to the stronger side. Hardin, on his feet again, was sputtering helplessly at Babcock, when Rickard called for a vote. The appropriation was carried. Hardin’s face was swollen with rage.

Rickard then called for a report on the clam-shell dredge being rushed at Yuma. Where was the machinery? Was it not to have been finished in February?

Hardin said that the machinery was ready, waiting in San Francisco. The hull of the dredge could not be finished for a couple of months at least.

“Why not get the machinery here? What’s the use of taking chances?” demanded Rickard.

Hardin felt the personal implication. He was on his feet in a second. “There are no chances.” He looked at MacLean. “The machinery’s done. It’s no use getting it here until we’re ready.”

“There are always chances,” interrupted his opponent coolly. “We are going to take none. I want Mr. Hardin, gentlemen, appointed a committee of one to see that the machinery is delivered at once, and the dredge rushed. What’s the date?”

“April eleventh,” clicked the nickel-in-the-slot-machine-Babcock again. Had any one asked the time, his answer as swift without consultation would have been as exact. He lived with his watch under his eye. Every few minutes he assured himself as to his gain on eternity.

“Get it in before the heavy summer traffic begins,” instructed Rickard.

The working force was informally discussed. Hardin said they could depend on hobo labor. His enthusiasm took fire; he saw the work begun on his gate. “That class of men flock like bees to such work as this. There’s no trouble getting them; they just drop in. Curious, isn’t it, how such fellows keep track of the world’s work? You build a levee, you begin a bridge, and there’s your hobo on the spot. It’s good labor, too, though it’s fickle.” It was the other Hardin, the chiseled man of affairs and experience. Rickard agreed that they would find such help, but it would not do to rely on it. The big sewer system of New Orleans was about completed; he had planned to write there, stating the need. And there was a man in Zacatecas, named Porter--

“Frank Porter?” sneered Hardin, “that--murderer?”

“His brother,” Rickard answered pleasantly. “Jim furnishes the men for the big mines in Sonora and Sinaloa. He’ll send us all the labor we want, the best for our purpose. When it gets red-hot, there’s no one like a peon or an Indian.”

“You’ll be infringing on the international contract law,” suggested MacLean.

“No. The camp is on the Mexican side,” laughed Casey. “I’d thought of that. We’ll have them shipped to the nearest Mexican point, and then brought to the border. Mr. Estrada will help us.”

The meeting had already adjourned. They were standing around the flat-top desk. Estrada invited them all to lunch with him, in the car on the siding. MacLean said that he had to get back to Los Angeles. Mr. Babcock was going to take him out to Grant’s Heading in the machine. He had never been there. They had breakfasted late. He looked very much the colonel to Rickard, his full broad chest and stiff carriage made more military by his trim uniform of khaki-colored cloth.

“May I speak to you about your boy, Mr. MacLean?”

Hardin caught a slight that was not intended. He pushed past the group at the door without civility or ceremony.

The steady grave eyes of the big frame looked at Rickard inquiringly.

“He wants to stay out another year. I hope you will let him. It’s not disinterested. I shall have to take a stenographer to the Heading this summer. There is a girl here; I couldn’t take her, and then, too, I’m old-fashioned; I don’t like women in offices. My position promises to be a peculiar one. I’d like to have your son to rely on for emergencies a stenographer could not cover.”

MacLean’s grave features relaxed as he looked down on the engineer, who was no small man himself, and suggested that his son was not very well up in stenography.

“That’s the least of it.”

“I hope that he will make a good stenographer! Good morning, gentlemen.”

At table, neither Estrada nor his guest uncovered their active thought which revolved around Hardin and his hurt. Instead, Rickard had questions to ask his host on river history. As they talked, it came to him that something was amiss--Estrada was accurate; he had all his facts. Was it enthusiasm, sympathy, he lacked? Presently he challenged him with it.

Estrada’s eyes dreamed out of the window, followed the gorge of the New River, as though out there, somewhere, the answer hovered.

“Do you mean, do you _doubt_ it?” exclaimed Rickard, watching the melancholy in the beautiful eyes.

Estrada shook his head, but without decision. “Nothing you’d not laugh at. I can laugh at it myself, sometimes.”

Rickard waited, not sure that anything more was coming. The Mexican’s dark eyes were troubled; a puzzle brooded in them. “It’s a purely negative sense that I’ve had, since I was a child. Something falls between me and a plan. If I said it was a veil, it would be--something!” His voice fell to a ghost of tunefulness. “And it’s--nothing. A blank--I know then it’s not going to happen. It is terribly final! It’s happened, often. Now, I wait for that--veil. When it falls, I know what it means.”

“And you have had that--sense about this river business?”

Estrada turned his pensive gaze on the American. “Yes, often. I thought, after father’s death, that that was what it meant. But it came again. It kept coming. I had it while you were all talking, just now. I don’t speak of this. It sounds chicken-hearted. And I’m in this with all my soul--my father--I couldn’t do it any other way, but--”

“You think we are going to fail?”

“I can’t see it finished,” was Estrada’s mournful answer. He turned again to stare out of the window.

An odd sense of unreality rested for an instant on Rickard. Swiftly he rejected it. Outside, the sunshine, the work to be done, the river running wild--

“You’ve been too much in the valley, Mr. Estrada!” Estrada looked at him, and then his glance went back to the car window. His silence said plainly: “Oh, I knew you would not believe me!”

“I mean, this country gets on men’s nerves. It’s so--omnipotent! The victories are all to the river’s side, as yet. We’re pygmies, fighting Titans. We fear what we have never conquered.”

“Oh, that!” He could see that Estrada would not argue with him. “Oh, we all get that. The personal feeling, as if it were really a dragon, and we trying to shackle it with our wisps of straw!”

“A few lace handkerchiefs and a chiffon veil!” sang Rickard’s memory.

“We get the sense of being resented, of angry power. We feel like interlopers in this desert. She tells us all, in her own terrible, silent way, ‘You don’t belong here!’”

“That has been quoted to me, silently, too!” laughed Rickard. And they were on solid ground again.

“Who are the river-men in the valley?” demanded the newcomer. “I want to meet them, to talk to them.”

“Cor’nel, he’s an Indian. He’s worth talking to. He knows its history, its legends. Perhaps some of it is history.”

“Where’s he to be found?”

“You’ll run across him! Whenever anything’s up, he is on hand. He senses it. And then there’s Matt Hamlin.”

“I’ll see him, of course. Has he been up the river?”

“No, but I’ll tell you two who have. Maldonado, a half-breed, who lives some twenty miles down the river from Hamlin’s. He knows the Gila as though he were pure Indian. The Gila’s tricky! Maldonado’s grandfather was a trapper, his great-grandfather, they say, a priest. The women were all Indian. He’s smart. Smart and bad.”

Estrada’s Japanese servant came back into the car to offer tea, freshly iced.

“That’s what I want, smart river-men, not tea!” laughed Rickard. “I want river history.”

“There’s another man you ought to meet.” Before he spoke the name, Rickard had a flash of telepathy; he knew Estrada would say, “Brandon.”

“He was with the second Powell expedition. He’s written the book on the river. He knows it, if any man does.”

“That’s so. I’d forgotten about him. I think I’ll run up and have a talk with him.”

“This instant?” smiled the Mexican, for his guest had risen. “There’s no train out until to-night.”

“I’ll ask Mr. MacLean to take a passenger. That will save me several hours; and an uncomfortable trip.”

“You wanted these maps.” Estrada was gathering them together.

Queer, how that name had flashed from Estrada’s mind to his. He hadn’t thought about Brandon--there was something in it, in the vitality, the force of thought. If that were true, then why not the other, that odd sense that Estrada spoke of? Seeing clear!

“Your maps, Mr. Rickard!”

“Thank you. And you can just strangle that foreboding of yours, Mr. Estrada. For I tell you, we’re going to govern that river!”

Estrada’s pensive smile followed the dancing step of the engineer until it carried him out of sight. Perhaps? Because he was the son of his father, he must work as hard as if conviction went with him, as if success waited at the other end of the long road. But it was not going to be. He would never see that river shackled--