CHAPTER VI

WHEELS WITHIN WHEELS

"I think, Delia," said the governess, as Nan was about to go upstairs, "if you have an ax, or something of the sort, I'll try to unbox my bicycle."

Nan came to an abrupt halt.  Bicycle!  The word went through her with an electric thrill, and sent her blood tingling.  Then she dragged herself unwillingly away.  What had she to do with the bicycle of a woman she hated.

"O Nan!" Miss Blake exclaimed, before the girl's lagging footsteps had carried her halfway up the staircase, "I'm sure your strong young arms can help us with this big elephant.  Will you lend a hand?"

Now could the governess have suspected that that was precisely what Nan had been longing to do?  But she could not have lingered unless she had been given the excuse by Miss Blake herself.  Had the request been made to serve as that excuse?

Nan did not stop to question.  She came flinging down stairs, two steps at a time, and Miss Blake and Delia smiled above her head as she bent down, wrenching and tugging with her main strength at the boards and stubborn nails, too excited to know that half the force she used would have served her better.

"There! that's my bicycle!" announced Miss Blake, displaying the beautiful machine with the pride of a possessor, when the last stay had been unscrewed, and the slender wheel stood revealed in all the glory of its spotless nickel-plate and rubber tires.

Nan gazed at it in speechless admiration.  It had been the dream of her life to own such a machine, but she had pleaded for one in vain.  Mr. Turner had explained to her that what money he held in trust for her was no more than served to pay for her running expenses.

"You know your father is not a rich man," he had said, "and lately he has met with losses.  He wishes you to be brought up under home influences rather than at a boarding-school among strangers.  He desires you to be well educated, and naturally all this costs.  Your father is willing to make many sacrifices that you may be well provided for, but he is not able to indulge you in a matter like this of the bicycle.  I wish I did not have to refuse you, but I think with him, that your most important need should be supplied first, and if after that little remains for mere indulgence, you must be satisfied.  By and by you will see that his course is best, if you do not see it already."

But Nan had never been able to feel that it was best that she should not have a bicycle.  Now that the new governess had come and had proved so "horrid," she felt it still less.  "Half the money she gets would buy me a first-rate safety," she had thought often and often and often, as she groaned over her father's perversity.

But here was one of the wonderful affairs actually in the house, and if it did not belong to her, what of that?  What was it the governess was just saying?

"I am quite sure you could use this wheel if we should shift the saddle up a bit, that is, if you care to ride.  As soon as the ground is clear I will teach you if you like."

Nan's face was radiant.  "Oh, I know how," she said.  "I've practiced lots on--on--a person's I know.  Only it wasn't a--a--girl's wheel. But I can ride."

Miss Blake was rubbing down the slender spokes with a piece of chamois skin.

"You are welcome to use mine, then," she said simply.

Nan choked out a meagre "Thank you."  It was not a gracious acknowledgment, but the governess accepted it, and really felt a glow of satisfaction in having called out even so much as an acceptance of her favor from her arbitrary young charge.

"Small favors thankfully received," she thought with a smile at her own humility.

Nan stood leaning against the wall with her hands behind her, watching the manoeuvres of the leathern rag as it flashed up and down the nickel spokes and around and about the hubs, guided by the dexterous hand of the little governess.

"Yes, I think we can pass many a jolly hour on this machine," resumed Miss Blake, "after the ground is clear of snow, and after we are clear of our lessons.  We'll begin our studies on Monday, Nan.  That will be commencing with the new week, and we must be very conscientious about our work before we indulge in any play."

"There!" thought Nan, with a rush of antagonism, "I might have known she'd make some kind of a fuss before she'd let me use it.  I guess she's sorry she promised in the first place, and wants to kind of back out of it.  Oh, well, I might have known.  Now she'll pile on lessons and things till there's no time for anything else.  That's her way of getting out of it."

But she made no comment.  She stood kicking her heel against the surbase, silently watching the sparkling machine.  Presently she turned and stalked upstairs without a word.

Delia gave Miss Blake an apologetic glance, but the governess composedly rose, and, stowing her property safely away against the closet wall, closed the door upon it and with a kind word to the woman beside her went upstairs as though nothing had happened.

She knew what was in Nan's mind.  She could read it as distinctly as if the sudden wrinkles on her forehead and the quick set of her obstinate jaw had been printed text.

"Poor child!" thought the governess, "how she hates study and--me.  How she rebels against restraint.  So she thinks I am trying to take back my word.  No wonder that makes her furious."

She went into her room and closed the door, but after a moment she came back and opened it again.

"Nan might feel shut out," she said to herself, and so she left it standing invitingly ajar that in case the girl cared to come in she would not have to knock.  She smiled to herself as she did it.  She knew well enough Nan would not care to come in.  "Still there might be a chance!"--she left the door open on the chance.

The more Nan thought of Delia's baseness the more she inwardly raged against it.  She sat in her own room with her feet over the register and munched caramels and nursed her grievance all the afternoon.  Delia was miserable.  She had tried by every means in her power to win at least a look from the girl, but all her attempts were repelled and she was treated with an overbearance that cut her to the quick.  At last she could stand it no longer.  She left her work and went upstairs "to have it out with Nan" and be done with it.

She knocked repeatedly at her bedroom door, but the girl obstinately refused to utter the word of admittance.  Delia was not to be daunted, however, by this, and at last, turning the knob, she walked boldly in and confronted Nan squarely.

"See here, Nan," she began without waiting, "I want to know what's the matter with you that you treat me so?  Me that has waited on you hand and foot and tended you night and day since you was a little baby?"

The girl did not deign to raise her eyes from her book--or else they were so rapidly filling with tears that she did not dare to do so.

Delia gulped.  "Can't you answer a civil question?" she faltered, trying to be firm and failing utterly.

Nan cast her book to the floor and sprang up to face the woman with blazing cheeks and eyes that flashed angry fire.

"You'd better ask me what's the matter, Delia Connor!" she burst out in a trembling voice.  "As if you didn't know!  Do you s'pose I'll bear everything?  It's bad enough--your being such an awful turn-coat!  You went over to her side the first thing, and every time she bosses me you just stand there and let her do it and never say a word.  You let her order me about like everything and never stand up for me a bit.  Her--a perfect stranger!  Somebody you never saw in all your life before!  But that isn't the worst of it!  Do you s'pose I'm going to stand your coming to my door and listening at the key-hole when I was rehearsing and then going and telling on me--telling her all I was going to do to her, I'd like to know?  You just wanted to get on the right side of her, and it was the meanest thing I ever heard of in all my life.  You came and peeked at me when I was rehearsing and then went and told her, and I s'pose you both laughed and had a fine time over it.  You thought you were very smart, didn't you?  But you got there too soon, Delia Connor, for I had made up my mind I wouldn't do it, so there!  But now you've both been so mean, I don't care who knows what I was going to do.  I hope you told her that I don't want her here.  I hope you told her every bit of that thing I learned by heart on purpose to recite to her.  I hope you repeated every word of it.  It's true and I hope she knows it.  I hope--"

"For the land's sake, Nan, do be still," broke out Delia at last after a dozen futile attempts to stem the tide of the girl's anger.  "I didn't listen nor peek nor anything, and you scream so loud she'll hear every word you say.  You--now be quiet and let me speak--you walked in your sleep last night.  You went into her room and said off a whole lot of balderdash to her--enough to set her against you for the rest of her life--if she ever finds out you really meant it."

Nan gave Delia an imploring, frightened look.

"Delia," she gasped, breathlessly, "do you--do you think she heard?"

Delia shook her head.

"Couldn't say for the life of me," she replied.  "Her door may have been open when I came up; I didn't notice."

Nan looked the picture of dismay.  "Wait a minute!--I'll go see!" she whispered earnestly, and tip-toed noiselessly into the hall.  A second later she returned, radiant with reassurance.

"Her door is tight shut, and she's making so much noise inside her room she couldn't possibly have heard.  Sounds as if she was dragging trunks around or something."

"Perhaps she's packing to go 'way," suggested Delia, with a grain of malice.

Nan fairly jumped with--well, if it wasn't joy it was something equally as moving in its way.  "Oh, no, no!" she cried, in a sudden fever of excitement.  "I don't want her to leave--like that.  Just think how awful it would be to have her leave--like that!  Can't you go to her and say I'm--you're good friends with her.  Delia, won't you please go and tell her I didn't really mean to say off that speech at her.  I learned it before she came, and I meant to recite it, but when I found that she was different--so little and kind of--different, I thought it would be mean to do it, and I gave it up.  Do go and tell her, Delia, please, and oh, won't you hurry?"

"Now see here, Nan," interposed the woman.  "Our best plan is to wait and see what she is going to do.  If she hasn't heard, it's all right, and telling her would only put the fat in the fire.  On the other hand, if she has heard and is packing up to go 'way, why, it wouldn't do much good, I'm afraid, to try to stop her.  With all being such a lady and so gentle in her ways, she's got a mind of her own--I can see that--and you won't be like to get her to change it.  But she'll tell you good-bye before she leaves, she's too much of a lady not to, no matter how she feels, and then you can say your say, and I promise you faithful I'll back you up."

Nan saw the wisdom of Delia's counsel, and tried to content herself to wait.  But the suspense of every minute was awful, and she felt herself growing frenzied under the strain.  After a time the commotion in the next room ceased, and all was quiet as the grave.  "She's getting on her hat now," gasped Nan.  "She'll go away and think I'm a heathen and all sorts of horrid things.  And she hasn't got any friends or folks of her own, and no house to go to but this.  And I s'pose she's awfully poor, because she wouldn't be a governess if she wasn't, and oh, dear! I don't want to have any one be a beggar, and turned out of the only roof they've got over their heads on my account.  That's what makes me feel so bad, Delia.  That's the only thing.  If she will go on her own account I'll--I'll be glad, but--oh, she mustn't go this way!"

Delia turned away her face to hide a smile.

"There's nothing to do but wait," she insisted.  "If I go in there and tell her, and she hasn't heard, why it would only give you away; don't you see?"

Nan let herself down in her rocking-chair with a dismal drop.  "O dear!" she cried, "I never saw anything like it!  The way things go wrong in this house!  It's just perfectly horrid!  I wish I was with my father, I do so!  I guess it's nicer in India than it is here, anyway; and I'm sick and tired of living cooped up in this old stuffy place. So there!"

Delia dusted some imaginary dust off the table with the corner of her apron, and went down stairs to finish up her work.

In the street below the huckster was yelling "Chestnuts!  Fresh-roasted chestnuts!"  The little charcoal oven in his push-cart sent out a shrill, continuous whistle, and Nan had an impulse to throw something at him.  What business had he to come here and make such a racket that she couldn't hear what was going on in the next room.  He passed slowly down the street, his call and the whistle of his oven growing fainter and fainter, and finally fading quite away as he disappeared in the distance.  Nan pricked up her ears.  Surely the sounds she heard were those of moving feet in the next room.  Back and forth they went, now nearer, that was to the closet, now further away again, that must be to the bureau.  What could the governess be doing?  The lid of her trunk was dropped, and Nan could distinctly hear the click of the catches as they fell in place.  There was no further doubt about it!  Miss Blake was going.  A moment later, and before Nan could collect her wits, the door of the next room was briskly opened and closed, and the governess, hatted and cloaked, sped quickly from the house.

Nan flew to the balusters with a hasty cry upon her lips, but was just in time to see the door swing heavily to; and that was all.  She flung herself down stairs two steps at a time.

"There now, Delia Connor," she cried, bursting into the kitchen with such vehemence that the very tins rattled on their shelves.  "There, now!  What did I tell you?  She's gone--Miss Blake's gone.  Trunks packed--!  Everything's packed!  She'll send men to get them.  She's gone clean off.  I told you what it would be, and you wouldn't go and speak to her.  And now my father will be disgraced, and Mr. Turner will blame me, and--it's all your fault, and I'll tell my father; so there!"

Delia's face paled suddenly.  She set her lips together tight.

"It's well you have some one to lay the blame on, child!" she said shortly, and went upstairs without another word.  Nan did not care to follow her into the governess' room, but stood outside and waited to hear her verdict when she should have examined the premises.

"Well?" asked the girl, eagerly, as soon as she came out.

"Her trunk's shut and locked, that's certain!"

"Then she's gone for good!"

"She's gone.  There ain't a doubt about that!"

"You said she would surely say good-bye, Delia Connor, you know you did.  You said no matter how she felt, she was such a lady she'd be certain to say good-bye!"

"Well, and I really thought so.  I believe now she'd have said good-bye, if--"

"If I hadn't been such a--brat?  Say it right out, Delia!  You mean it and you might as well say what you think," broke in the girl bitterly.

Delia turned on her heel and stalked grimly down stairs.  A second later she heard a rush of flying feet behind her, and the next moment two arms were locked about her neck.

"Poor old Delia," cried Nan, in one of her sudden bursts of remorse. "I'm the horridest girl that ever lived!  I know it as well as you do, and if you weren't the patientest thing in the world you wouldn't stand it for a minute.  But don't you go away from me too, Delia!  Please don't!  Honest Injun, I'll try to behave!  Cross my heart I will.  And I tell you this much, I feel just awfully about Miss Blake.  I shouldn't wonder a bit but it would snow tonight, and she hasn't a place to go and no money, and--O dear!  I feel like a person that ought to be in jail!"

Delia extricated herself gently from the clinging arms.  "What makes you think Miss Blake's as poverty-stricken as that?" she asked.

"Oh, I don't know," responded the girl.  "But I just feel she is.  And she is so little too.  She looked so glad to get into this house that I guess she never had much of a place to stay before."

"She don't dress like a person that's next-door to a beggar," mused Delia.

"No, she doesn't.  She has really pretty things, hasn't she?  But I guess they're made over and cast-off, or something.  Maybe the lady she lived with last gave them to her?" speculated Nan.

"Maybe she did," said Delia.

The two made their way slowly down to the kitchen.  It was beginning to grow dark and the dinner must be prepared.

"I never in all my life saw such little hands and feet," the girl pursued.  "And she's dreadfully particular about them.  There's never a speck on her fingers that she doesn't run right up and scrub them, and she wears the cunningest slippers I ever saw."

"I guess she comes of nice folks," said Delia, as she began to peel the potatoes.

"Wonder why she doesn't stay with them then?" put in Nan.

"Perhaps they're dead."

Nan pondered.  Her own motherless life had given her a very tender sympathy for those whose "folks" were dead.  For the first time she felt sorry for Miss Blake.  She was uneasy and distressed.  It made her shift about uncomfortably in her chair.

"Goodness me!" she ejaculated impatiently at last, and then one of her wild impulses took possession of her and she ran frantically up into her own room and flung on her coat and hat.

"The whole thing's as plain as preaching.  Why didn't I think of it before?" she said to herself, with a shake of impatience.  "Mr. Turner told Miss Blake if she was worried or anything to go to him.  She hasn't any money, and she's left here, so of course that's where she is.  I'll go and bring her back."

The front door opened and shut with a bang, and Nan was out in the street alone.  As she scudded down the pavement the electric lights suddenly gleamed out pale and vivid from their lofty globes, and sent wavering shadows flashing across her path.

"It's pretty late and it'll be dark as a pocket in a little while," thought she; but that did not detain her, and she raced on, putting block after block between her and home in her ardor to make reparation and to lighten her heart of its weight of compunction.