CHAPTER VII

OPEN CONFESSION

Nan knew the way to Mr. Turner's house perfectly, though she had not been able to give Mrs. Newton the street and number.  She was observing and clear-headed, and could have been trusted to find her way about the entire city alone, but her father had often cautioned Delia and the girl herself against putting her power to the test, and so it happened that until now she had never been any considerable distance away from home after twilight without a companion.  The way was perfectly familiar to her--but it had never seemed so interminably long.  She could have taken a car, but in her haste to get off she had forgotten her pocketbook.  She saw the "trolleys" fly past her in quick succession, and it seemed to her they whizzed jeeringly at her as they sped.  She was by nature so fearless that even if the street had not been thronged she would not have been afraid.  As it was she was only alarmed lest she would get to Mr. Turner's and find Miss Blake gone.

She hurried on breathlessly, fairly skipping with impatience and wondering what explanation she could give the lawyer in case the governess had not told him the real reason of her departure.  Somehow it flashed into Nan's mind that Miss Blake would not expose her.  She was busied with this reflection as she turned off the broad, well-lighted thoroughfare into the dimmer side-street upon which Mr. Turner lived, and she ran up the steps of his house with the question still unsettled.  It was not a moment before the door was opened to her and she was admitted to the warm, luxuriously furnished drawing-room. It was Nan's ideal of a house: "all full of curtains and soft carpets and beautiful things."  She seated herself before the burning log-fire with a sensation of deep well-being--only it was a little over-shadowed by her worry about the governess.

"Well, my little lady, and what brings you here at this time of day?" was Mr. Turner's greeting, as he strode across the room to meet her.

"O Mr. Turner!" began Nan, bluntly, "I came to see you about Miss Blake.  I want to know--I wonder if you--"

"Indeed!  And how is that charming lady?  You must tell her I had hoped to see her before this, but I have been unusually busy, and every moment has been taken up.  Now tell me, isn't it as I said?  Hasn't she completely won your heart?  Aha!  I see she has!  I see she has!"

Nan flushed and stammered, and did not reply.  Inwardly, she was in a turmoil.  Either Miss Blake had not come here at all or the lawyer was trying to baffle her.  And if Miss Blake had not come here, then where was she?  A sort of dumb terror took hold of the girl and shook her from head to foot.

"You see I was right," pursued the lawyer, cheerfully.  "I knew you would surrender to her the first thing.  Every one does.  I think I never knew any one who was more universally loved.  Now, how can I help you, my dear?  Give you some extra pin-money to buy Miss Blake a Christmas present, eh?  Is that it?"

Nan caught at the suggestion eagerly as being a way out of her difficulty, and nodded a gulping assent.

"Well, you needn't have traveled all this distance for such a simple matter, my dear," he assured her genially.  "And after dark, too!  A note would have served, you know; a note would have served.  But I'm glad you like her so well, and you shall have the money at once.  Your father would be delighted I am sure."

It was only after Nan had been gone some time that Mr. Turner remembered with a start that she was alone and that it was night.  It was too late then to overtake her, so he had to resign himself with the thought that the girl was admirably self-reliant, and that her way lay almost entirely along well-lit and busy avenues.

The thought of danger did not occupy Nan for a moment.  Her only fear now was for the governess.  If she wasn't at Mr. Turner's, then where was she?  She asked herself this question over and over again.  The girl blushed as she thought of the untruth she had been guilty of in implying that the lawyer's suggestion had been her motive in coming to him.  She sharpened her pace, as if to outstrip the memory of her misdeed, but it, with her other worry, seemed to pursue her, and presently her imagination so quickened at the thought that she actually fancied she heard some one behind keeping step with her.  She broke into a brisk run.  Clap! clap! came the sound of hastening feet behind her.  With a sort of tortured courage she slackened her pace.  Whatever was following her also took a slower gait.  She cast a furtive look over her shoulder and gave a horrified gasp as her eyes squarely encountered two other eyes, which were fixed upon her own in an insulting leer from beneath the rim of a rakish felt hat which was worn tilted on the side of a very unprepossessing head.  The eyes, bad as they were, proved the best feature in a thoroughly vicious face, and for the first time in her life Nan felt frightened--chokingly frightened.  She would have rushed on, but a stealthy hand held her back.

"Don't try to run away from me, little lady!" said an unsteady voice in her ear in a tone that was intended to seem engaging.  "Don't try to run away from me, if you please.  I wouldn't hurt you for the world, no, indeed."

Nan shook herself free from the disgusting touch and hurried on without a word.  Her hateful shadow kept abreast with her.

"You ain't afraid of me, are you?" he asked reproachfully.

Nan made no response.  Her feet seemed to cling to the pavement.  Every time she lifted one it was with an effort.

"Oh, come now," whined the voice in her ear, "don't go on like this.  I ain't going to hurt you.  I'm only a poor man who would be grateful for a penny or two.  By the way, where's your pocket-book?"

Nan leaped suddenly aside, and as she did so she missed her footing, and a cry of pain burst from her lips.  A sharp pang shot from her ankle to her knee, and when she tried to take another step she found the darting agony returned.  But stop she could not.  Her face grew gray and lined with misery as she dragged forward, saving her injured ankle as much as she could, but always having to torture it intolerably with every onward limp.  Her persecutor caught up with her promptly, and she cast beseeching looks for deliverance on every side, which the hurrying, preoccupied crowd was too intent on its own affairs to see. If only she could see a policeman!  She knew what she would do.  She would make believe she was going past him and then suddenly veer about and say, "Officer, this man is annoying me!" and before he had time to realize what she had done the rowdy would be arrested.  But no policeman was in sight, and her fine scheme could not be carried out. Suddenly in the midst of her agony of mind and body her heart gave a wild bound of unspeakable relief.

"Miss Blake!  Miss Blake!" she almost shrieked.

"Nan!"

The little governess was beside her in a flash, her own face almost as white and seamed as the girl's.



"O Miss Blake! this man--make him go away; make some one send him away. He's annoying me--and my foot!"

The governess grew if possible a shade paler.  "What man?" she demanded sharply, "Where?"

Nan could not speak.  She indicated with a mute gesture.  Miss Blake looked behind her, but if there had actually been such a man as the girl described he must certainly have taken to his heels.  They were standing alone in the midst of the hurrying crowd.

"O Nan!" cried the governess, not stopping to argue the question, "where have you been?  Delia and I have been frantic with worry.  She is out now hunting for you.  She went one way and I another."

Nan could not reply.  The torture in her ankle grew fiercer with every movement.  She shook her head silently and limped on.

"You are hurt!  You are in pain!" cried Miss Blake, now for the first time really realizing her condition.

Nan nodded dumbly.

"Take my arm; no, lean on my shoulder!  There, that's better!  Bear down as hard as you can and use me as your crutch!  I'm strong.  I won't give out."

And a right good support she proved.  Happily they were but a stone's throw from home, and it was not long before Nan was comfortably settled on the library lounge, luxuriously surrounded by all sorts of downy cushions and having her injured ankle bound in soothing cloths by the tenderest of hands.  Delia, full of sympathy and the desire to help, was bustling about nervously, tripping over bandages and upsetting bottles of liniment, but meaning so well all the while that one could not discourage her.

"It is only a strain.  You have turned your ankle badly and the muscles have been wrenched, but I don't think it is an actual sprain," said Miss Blake, consolingly.  "However, if the pain is still bad to-morrow, we'll have a doctor in to look at it.  Do you still have Dr. Milbank, Delia?"

Nan sat bolt upright with surprise.

"How funny!" she cried.  "However in the world did you know Dr. Milbank was our doctor?  Why, we've had him for years and years.  Ever since I was born and before, too.  But how could you know?"

Delia hurried out of the room muttering something about the dinner, and Miss Blake bent her head over the bandage she was rolling.

"He lives so near," she replied haltingly.

"I've seen his sign often as I passed and--and--perhaps that is why I thought he might be your physician.  He's so convenient--within call. It is hard to tell what makes one jump at conclusions sometimes."

Nan sank back among her cushions not half satisfied.  "Dr. Pardee lives near, too.  Just as near as Dr. Milbank does," she persisted.

The governess made no response, and just then Delia came staggering in under the weight of a huge brass tray which she bore in her arms.

Miss Blake jumped to her feet.  "We're going to have a dinner-party up here to-night, Nan," she said.  "Won't it be fun?" and she set to work unfolding a strange foreign-looking stand that Nan had never seen before and upon which Delia carefully placed the tray.

"Why, what a dandy little table it makes!" exclaimed Nan, admiringly. "Where did it come from?"

"I brought it from London, but it was made in India," explained Miss Blake.

Nan's eyes softened.  "Where papa is!" she murmured softly to herself. "You have lots of nice things," she added, after a moment.  "These pillows are downright daisies.  I s'pose they belong to you."

The governess served her with soup.  "They are yours whenever you care to use them," she returned in her quiet way.

"It's jolly having dinner up here," said Nan, not quite knowing how to respond to such a generous offer.

"Yes, isn't it?" assented the governess.

"Mrs. Newton don't use her basement for a dining-room, and neither does Mr. Turner.  I wish we didn't.  I think it would be perfectly fine if we could have ours up here, too."

"Why couldn't you?"

The girl leaned forward with a look of real interest in her face.

"Do you think we might?" she asked eagerly.

"I don't see why not.  The books might be shifted to the other room. This might be re--well, re-arranged, and I'm sure it would make a charming dining-room."

"But that ugly old glass extension back there!" protested Nan in disgust.  "Who wants to look at a lot of old trunks and broken-up things when one is eating?  If we could only pull it down."

Miss Blake considered a moment.

"Why not take all the old trunks and broken-up things out entirely and make a conservatory of it.  It faces the south.  Plants would grow beautifully there."

Nan clapped her hands.  "Why, that's perfectly splendiferous," she cried.  "I never should have thought of it.  I say, Miss Blake, let's do it right away, will you?  I love flowers."

"Would you take care of them?" demanded the governess with a thoughtful look.

"Uh-huh!" nodded Nan, heartily.  "I guess I would!"

"Very well, then," returned Miss Blake encouragingly, "I'll think about it.  Perhaps Delia wouldn't consent.  You know there is no dumb-waiter in the house, and if she had to carry up all the dishes at every meal, it would more than double her work."

Nan's face fell.  "O dear!" she complained.  "What a horrid old house! Can't do a single thing with it!  It would have been such fun to change everything about!"

Miss Blake laughed.  "Oh, if that was all your reason for wanting the improvements," she retorted.  "I thought you wanted to gratify your sense of the beautiful."

"Well, I do," declared Nan.

"Then we'll see what can be done," and the governess set down her glass of water with a very knowing smile.

After dinner was eaten and Delia had carried away the tray and Miss Blake removed the wonderful folding stand, the governess looked up suddenly and said with unusual gravity:

"Nan, while I am here I hope you will never run out after dark alone again.  It is dangerous.  Do you understand me, my dear?"

The girl's eyes dropped.  Yes, she understood perfectly.  When the governess spoke in that low, decided voice it would have been hard to mistake her meaning.

"I had to go to-night," Nan answered, in a suddenly sullen voice.

"If you had waited a few moments I could have, and most willingly would have, gone with you.  Never hesitate to ask me.  I am always at your service.  That is what I am here for."

Nan hesitated.  "I--I thought you had gone away--for good," she stammered, lamely.

Miss Blake flushed.  "What made you think I had gone away for good?" she asked, slowly repeating the girl's words.

Nan shook her head and gulped.

"I was in my room," continued the governess, after a pause, "and I heard--"

Nan put out both hands.  "I know it!  I know it!" she gasped.  "But I didn't mean what I said--I didn't, honestly and truly.  Before you came I learned it off, and I meant to say it, but that was before I saw you. I feel different now, and I hope--I hope--"

Miss Blake's hand was laid quietly on hers.  "Wait a moment, Nan. Don't go on till you know what I was going to say.  You seem to be trying to explain something that perhaps you might regret later.  You think I overheard something you would rather I did not know?  What I was going to say is this: I was in my room this afternoon and I heard a man crying 'Chestnuts!'  It carried me back to the time when I was a little girl and used to roast them in this very--" she hesitated, then added slowly, "town.  So I went out to buy some, that we might have a little jollification together with nuts and apples and perhaps a cookie or two, if Delia would give them to us.  That is why I went out."

Nan twisted her fingers and looked down.  "And I went out because you did," she faltered.  "I thought you had gone away, and I went to Mr. Turner's to bring you back--if you would come.  Say, now, didn't you hear what I said to Delia?  I was awfully mad, and I guess I spoke out loud enough so folks on the next block could have heard.  Honest now, didn't you?"

Miss Blake did not answer at once, and Nan could see that a struggle of some sort was going on in her mind.  When she raised her face her eyes were very grave.

"Yes, Nan, I did hear!" she confessed, honestly.

The girl's cheeks blazed with sudden shame.

"And yet you weren't going to leave?" she said.  "You were only going to do a kindness to me?"

Miss Blake shook her head.

"Dear Nan," she answered, smiling wistfully, "a good soldier never runs away for a mere wound.  He stays on the field until he has won his battle or--until--he is mortally hurt.  I do not think you will ever wish to cut me as deeply as that, and so--and so--I will stay until--the general orders me off the field.  The day I hear that your father is to come back, that day I will resign my position in this house.  Until then, however, you must reconcile yourself to my presence here, and I think we should both be much happier if you would try to do so at once, my dear."