CHAPTER III


The camp on the bank of the Rabcza was shared by the troop from Fertöszeg and by a militia company of infantry from Wieselburg.

The parole had been given out for the night. Count Vavel had completed his round of the outposts, and had returned to the officers' tent. Here he found awaiting him two old acquaintances--the vice-palatine and the young attorney from Pest, each of them wearing the light-blue dolman.

The youthful attorney, whose letters to the count had voiced the national discontent, had at once girded on his sword when the call to arms had sounded throughout the land, and was now of one mind with his quondam patron: if he got near enough to a Frenchman to strike him, the result would certainly be disastrous--for the Frenchman. Bernat bácsi also found himself at last in his element, with ample time and opportunity for anecdotes. Seated on a clump of sod the root side up, with both hands clasping the hilt of his sword, the point of which rested on the ground, he repeated what he had heard from the palatine's own lips, while dining with that exalted personage in the camp by the Raab.

At a very interesting point in his recital he was unceremoniously interrupted by the challenging call of the outposts:

"Halt! who comes there?"

Vavel hastened from the tent, flung himself on his horse, and galloped in the direction of the call. The patrol had stopped an armed man who would not give the password, but insisted that he had a right to enter the camp.

Vavel recognized Satan Laczi, and said to the guard:

"Release him; he is a friend of mine." Then to the ex-robber: "Come with me."

He led the way to his own private tent, where he bade his companion rest himself on a pallet of straw.

"I dare say you are tired, my good fellow."

"Not very," was the reply. "I have come only from Kapuvar to-day."

"On foot?"

"Part of the way, and part of the way swimming."

"What news do you bring?"

"We captured a French courier in the marshes near Vitnyed just as he was about to ride into the stream."

"Where is he?"

"Well, you see, one of my fellows happened to grasp him a little too tightly by the collar, because he resisted so obstinately--and, besides, it must have been a very weak cord that fastened his soul to his body."

"You have not done well, Satan Laczi," reproved the count. "Another time you must bring the prisoner to me alive, for I may learn something of importance from him. Did not I tell you that I would pay a reward for a living captive?"

"Yes, your lordship, and we shall lose our reward this time. But we did n't capture the fellow for nothing, after all. We searched his pockets, and found this sealed letter addressed to a general in the enemy's army."

Vavel took the letter, and said: "Rest here until I return. You will find something to eat and drink in the corner there. I may want you to ride farther to-night."

"If I am to go on a horse, that will rest me sufficiently," was the response.

Vavel quitted the tent to read the letter by the nearest watch-fire. It was addressed to "General Guillaume."

That the general commanded a brigade of the viceroy of Italy's troops, Vavel knew.

The letter was a long one--four closely written pages. Before reading it Vavel glanced at the signature: "Marquis de Fervlans." The name seemed familiar, but he could not remember where he had heard it. He was fully informed when he read the contents:

     "M. GENERAL: The intrigue has been successfully carried out.      Themire has found the fugitives! They are hidden in a secluded nook      on the shore of Lake Neusiedl in Hungary, where their extreme      caution has attracted much attention. Themire's first move was to      take up her abode in the same neighborhood, which she did in a      masterly manner. The estate she bought belonged to a Viennese baron      who had ruined himself by extravagance. Themire bought the      property, paying one hundred thousand guilders for it, on condition      that she might also assume the baron's name; such transfers are      possible, I believe, in Austria. In this wise Themire became the      Baroness Katharina Landsknechtsschild, and, as she thoroughly      understands the art of transformation, became a perfect German      woman before she took possession of her purchase. In order not to      arouse suspicion on the part of the fugitives, she carefully      avoided meeting either of them, and played to perfection the rôle      of a lady that had been jilted by her lover.

     "Themire learned that our fugitive owned a powerful telescope with      which he kept himself informed of everything that happened in the      neighborhood, and this prompted her to adopt a very amusing plan of      action. _I_ wanted to put an end at once to the matter, and had      gone to Vienna for the purpose of so doing. I entered the Austrian      army as Count Leon Barthelmy, in order to be near my chosen      emissary. But my scheme was without result. I had planned that a      notorious robber of that region should steal the girl and the      documents from the Nameless Castle,--as the abode of the fugitives      is called,--but my robber proved unequal to the task. Consequently      I was forced to accept Themire's more tedious but successful plan.      The difficulty was for Themire to become acquainted with our      fugitive without arousing his suspicions. An opportunity offered.      One night, when we knew to a certainty that the hermit in the      Nameless Castle would be in his observatory because of an eclipse      of the moon, Themire put her plan into operation. The hermit, who      is only a man, after all, found a lovely woman more attractive than      all the planets in the universe; he was captured in the net laid      for him! When the moon entered the shadow, four masked robbers      (Jocrisse was their leader!) climbed into the Baroness      Landsknechtsschild's windows. The hermit in his observatory beheld      this incursion, and, being a knight as well as a recluse, what else      could he do but rush to the rescue of his fair neighbor? His      telescope had told him she was fair. Jocrisse played his part      admirably. At the approach of the deliverer the "robbers" took to      their heels, and the brave knight unbound the fettered and charming      lady he had delivered from the ruffians. As Themire had prepared      herself for the meeting, you may guess the result: the hermit was      captured!"

Oh, how every drop of blood in Vavel's veins boiled and seethed! His face was crimsoned with shame and rage. He read further:

     "Themire was perfectly certain that the mysterious hermit of the      Nameless Castle had fallen in love with her; and _I_ am not so sure      but Themire has ended by falling in love with the knight! Women's      hearts are so impressionable.

     "I managed to have my regiment sent to her neighborhood, and took      up my quarters in her house. I sought by every means to lure the      hermit from his den; but he is a cunning fox, is this protector of      fair ladies! I could not get a sight of him. I decided at last to      waylay him (when he would be out driving with the veiled lady), to      pretend that I was a betrayed husband in search of his errant wife,      and ask to see the face of his veiled companion. This, naturally,      he would refuse. A duel would be the result; and as he has not for      years had a weapon in his hand, and as I am a dead shot, you can      guess the result--a hermit against a Spadassin! With a bullet in      his brain, the mysterious maid would become my property."

Here an icy chill shook Vavel's frame. He read on:

     "That was my intention. But something on which I had not counted      prevented me from carrying it out. When I insisted on seeing the      face of the veiled lady, after telling him I believed her to be my      wife, Ange Barthelmy (I need not tell you that that entire story      was an invention of my own; I published it in a provincial      newspaper, whence it spread all over Europe), my brave hermit      showed a very bold front, and we were on the point of exchanging      blows, when the lady suddenly flung back her veil and revealed the      face of--Themire! You may believe that I was dumfounded for an      instant; then I began to believe that my faith in this woman had      been misplaced. Could it be possible that she had been caught in      her own trap--that she had found this Vavel's eyes more alluring      than the fortune we promised her, and that instead of betraying him      to us she would do the very opposite--betray us to him? It may be      that she has woven a more delicate web than I can detect with which      to entangle her romantic victim the more securely. At all events,      when I asked Vavel what relation the lady at his side bore to him,      he replied: 'She is my betrothed wife.'

     "I confess I am puzzled. But I have the means of compelling Themire      to keep her promise. Her daughter is in my power!"

("Her daughter?" gasped Vavel. "Her daughter? Then Katharina is a married woman!")

     "But," he continued to read, "it might happen that a woman who is      in love would sacrifice her child. So soon as this war broke out,      Vavel threw off his hermit's mask, and is now leading a company of      troopers--which he equipped at his own expense--against us.

     "From Jocrisse's letters I learn that Vavel's treasures are now in      Themire's hands. That which our fair emissary was commissioned to      find is in her possession. Now, however, the question is, What will      she do with it?

     "Jocrisse also informs me that Themire is quite bewitched with the      amiability of the maid who has been intrusted to her care. If this      be true, then matters are in a bad way. If this is not another of      Themire's schemes, but actual sympathy, if this girl, whose      remarkable loveliness of character (even Jocrisse is compelled to      praise her) has won the piquant little Amélie's place in her      mother's heart, then it will be more difficult to separate Themire      from the girl than to win her from her lover."

This was a solitary ray of sunshine amid the threatening clouds which enveloped Ludwig. He continued to read with rapidly beating heart:

     "I must know to a certainty what Themire proposes to do. To-day I      sent her a message by a trusty courier, informing her that I should      be at a certain place at an appointed time--that I wanted her to      meet me and deliver into my hands the treasures she now holds. She      will have an excellent excuse for leaving the manor. Our troops are      approaching Steiermark, and have already crossed the Hungarian      border. Thus it will seem as if she fell by accident into the hands      of the enemy.

Vavel's heart almost ceased to beat. The letter shook in his trembling hands.

     "I shall not, however," he continued to read, "depend on the fickle      mood of a woman, who may be swayed by a tear or a love-letter. If      Themire does not appear with the maid and the documents at the      designated spot to-morrow evening, then I shall ride with my troop      to the manor. My troop, as you know, belongs to the 'Legion of      Demons,' and they do not know the definition of the word      'impossible'! If Themire of her own free will delivers the      treasures into my hands, I shall thank her becomingly. If, however,      she fails to meet me, I shall take the maid and the documents by      force."

Vavel did not notice that the firelight by which he was reading the letter had begun to grow dim; he believed the characters on the page before him were swimming in a blood-red mist.

     "And now," the letter went on, "I come to my instructions to you,      general. You will move with your division toward the southern      shore of Lake Neusiedl, and cut off the way of our fugitives toward      the Tyrol. There is also another task which you must undertake. The      mysterious maid, once she is in our hands, must be treated with the      utmost courtesy and respect. A remarkable destiny awaits her. You      know the emperor is going to separate from Josephine. A new palace      will be built for the new empress. Who is the fortunate lady? As      yet, no one can tell. A royal maid who can bring as her dowry the      crown of a sovereign. A marriage that would unite the imperial      crown with the crown of Hugo Capet would firmly establish      Napoleon's throne. The legitimate dynasty would then be satisfied      with the sovereign chosen by the people. This fugitive maid is, I      hear, lovely, amiable, generous, pure, as only the ideal of a      sovereign can be."

Vavel stamped his foot in a paroxysm of fury. Had this miscreant written that Marie was to be imprisoned in a convent, he could have borne it. But to suggest that his idol, his pure, adored image of a saint, might become the consort of the man on whom all the savage hatred of his nature was concentrated--this was more horrible than all the torments of hell. But he must calm himself and read the letter to the end.

     "With this probability in view, I request that you send your wife      and daughter, with a proper escort, of course, to meet me in one of      the border cities, say Friedberg, where the ladies will be prepared      to take charge of the maid. You will understand that a lady of her      exalted position must travel only in company with distinguished      persons. Countess Themire Dealba's rôle is concluded. She must not      be allowed, in any character, to accompany our presumptive      sovereign to Paris. She will receive her five millions of francs,      as promised, and that will conclude our business transactions with      her. Pray communicate my desire to your wife and daughter, and bid      them prepare for the journey.

     "Very truly,

     "MARQUIS DE FERVLANS."

Not for one instant did Ludwig Vavel deliberate as to his course of action.

He could not leave his post. For a soldier to quit his post before the enemy is treason. He hurried back to his tent. Satan Laczi was stretched on the bare ground, sleeping soundly.

Ludwig shook him vigorously.

"Awake--awake! You must depart at once."

Satan Laczi sprang to his feet.

"Take my own horse, and ride for your life the shortest way to Fertöszeg."

"And what am I to do there?"

"Do you remember that an officer once asked you to steal the treasure I kept concealed in the Nameless Castle?"

"Yes; but I did n't do it."

"Well, I want you to do it now for me."

"Which do you want, the maid or the casket?"

"Both, if possible; the maid in any case. But you must be sure that she is alone when you approach her. Then say merely the name 'Sophie Botta,' and she will listen quietly to what you have to say. Then show her this ring,--here, put it on your left thumb"--he drew the steel ring from his own thumb and slipped it on to Satan Laczi's,--"and say, 'The person who wears this ring sent me to fetch you away from here. You are to come with me at once.'"

"And where am I to take her?"

"You will have a carriage with four swift horses at the park gate nearest the cemetery, and must drive with the maid to Raab.--Don't stop on any account until you get there. In Raab you will inquire for the house of Dr. Tromfszky, who is our army physician. He will have been advised of your coming, and will take charge of the maid. Then you will return to me here, and report what you have done. Here is a passport; if you are stopped at our lines show it to the guard. And here is a purse; don't spare the contents. And do not speak to a living soul about your mission."

"Your orders shall be obeyed," responded Satan Laczi, as he turned to leave the tent.

Vavel did not go back to the officers' tent. He went out into the night, and stood with folded arms, gazing with unseeing eyes into the darkness.