
Nov. 21/06

Thomas W. Lawson Esq. Boston, Mass.

Dear Sir,

I take it for granted that you want to know how the “Public” is going to take to your latest writing “fiction” and how are you to know unless your unknown friends write you?

I have read every thing you have ever written because I believe in you and admire the work you have done and are doing and allow me to say that I finaly believe that you will one day be recognized as one of the greatest story writers of the age. The first section of “Friday the Thirteenth” has convinced me that you will be a sure winner.

Yours very truly, L. Guy Dennett



Angola Tulare Co. Cal. Dec. 29, 1906

W. T. Lawson,

Dear Sir,

I wanted to thank you for the first number of “Friday the 13th”, but did not know your address. “Everybody’s” contains some letters written you to Boston so hope this may reach its destination.

I live in the wildest of the wooley west + such a god send as in “Everybody’s” (sent me by a sister in Oakland Cal.) + containing the first number of your story, words inadequately suffices. Friday the 13th made an impression on me which I could not easily shake off if I would. I was so sorry it ended where it did that I wanted to cry out + could hardly wait for the Jan. number. Yesterday I bought one in Hanford Cal. rode 30 miles north to get it. I live a mile from the recently filled in basin of old Tulare Lake. The snowfall on the mountains argue that our part of the Wild + Wooley may soon be a fishing station instead of an alfalfa ranch.

Perhaps you don’t understand how much your story is appreciated.

You are Bob Brownley, _I know_. Can you really _feel_ what you write as you make us do? Your characters appeal to me so that I live with them, every nerve alert to the straining point (but with pleasure). You are certianly the idol of the American people. I’ve heard you discussed by rich + poor, monopolist + antimonopolist during the publication of “Frenzied Finance” + the worst a monopolist could say was that you were as bad as the Standard Oil, but wanted to get even. “What is that but a virtue,” exclaimed I. “Couldn’t he have made millions by staying in, but _he_ recognized his past failings and exposed  S.O. to uphold a nation. May honor attend him. Isn’t that being a man and a gentleman?”

People read “Frenzied Finance” to a man + would loan the magazine one to another so those who felt the 15¢ impossible could get the good of your revelations.

I’m glad you believe in sentiment—the heart-lasting sentiment (instead of dollars and desire) which I feared was becoming a thing of the past; There are still splendid men in America. God bless them.

O happy New Year may the weight of your pen sway millions. Amen.

Respectfully, Louise D. Tennent

See 14 Kings

Angola P.O. Ca.




Spokane, Wash., December 28. 1906.

Mr. Thomas W. Lawson, Boston, Mass.

Dear Sir:

I have lived nine years in Anaconda, Montana, and therefore become somewhat familiar with amalgamated copper, etc. I want to say I have followed your writings with lively interest and have sworn by all the statements you have made. It is, therefore, with the greatest regret that I am compelled to state that my faith in you has been shattered.

When you state in your story of “Friday the 13th” that the heroine walked in to an office in New York in the middle of July with a feather turban on her head I simply cannot swallow it. That a lady of refinement and good taste with $30,000 in the bank, and anxious to make a good appearance, should walk into an office in New York with a winter hat taxes my credulity to the breaking point. However, be that as it may, I want to say that you have made a big fight against great odds and that I admire your pluck and genius, and I hope you will keep right on fighting for the right.

By the way, I might as well admit that it was my wife by the way is a superior woman who called my attention to the turban when I was reading your story aloud to her. I am,

Very truly yours, John Ortson




O’Fallon, Ill. Nov. 22nd, 1906

Thos W. Lawson Boston, Mass.

Dear Sir,

It has afforded me great pleasure to just have finished your first installment to “Friday the 13th,” as have also your previous writings, from which I learned a great deal,—although from a financial standpoint, following what I thought to be your advice, I am several thousand dollars looser,—and I take this means of contributing my mite of encouragement, firmly believing that your work is doing a great good, and trusting that success on the lines you have mapped out, will be your reward.

Very respectfully, Wm. A. Staney.

(I’m awaiting your next installment)




Dear sir:

I have only had the pleasure of meeting you once—in your private car, with Thayer, when you were returning from your western trip—but I hope you will not consider me presuming if I take a moment of your valuable time to thank you for your masterpiece just begun in Everybody’s.

Such magic has not flowed from a pen for many a year.

Yours Truly John O Powers

206 North 34th Street Philadelphia




Des Moines, Iowa, 11/20, 1906

Mr. Thos. Lawson Boston.

Dear Sir,

I like your story “Friday the Thirteenth.” For the information and added knowledge your previous writing has given me I thank you.

—“for the crow that is in him and the spurs that are on him to back up the crow with.” You certainly are a game and competant old fighter.

Sincerely, with best wishes 




St. Paul, Minn., November 26, 1906.

Mr. Thomas W. Lawson, Boston, Mass.

Dear Sir:

I wish to congratulate you on the good story you wrote in Everybody’s Magazine this month. It is the beat story I ever read and the best I ever saw published in any magazine.

I am well posted on the “Brokers” business and enjoyed your story very much. I hope you will continue to write them. I know they are taken more from real life than immagination. I am sure they will be appreciated as much as “Frenzied Finance”. I have taken the liberty to send a good word to Ridgway’s.

With best wishes, I remain Yours respectfully,

Western Union Telegraph Co. R.A. Kelly




Los Angeles, Calif., December 11, 1906.

Mr. Thomas W. Lawson, Boston, Mass.

My dear Sir:

It was indeed a pleasure to read your novel in this month’s Everybody’s. Being an old trader myself, I have appreciated every word of it and look forward for the continuation with much interest.

I just want to say this too—that anyone who says that you cannot write anything else but “Street” gossip had better cover his “shorts”.

Wishing you all kinds of success, and with congratulations on your splendid work, I am

Very sincerely,

Nancy Brown 214 Citizens Nat’l Bank Bldg.




Washington, D.C., December 1, 1906.

Thos. W. Lawson, Esq., Boston, Mass.

Dear Sir:

I have just read with very great pleasure and edification the first installment of your excellent story “Friday the 13th”. It is so far a masterpiece.

Congratulating you. I remain Very truly, M. H. Ramaze




Cleburn, Texas, Dec 3 1906

Mr. Thos. W. Lawson Boston

Dear Sirs:

I have just your first installment of “Friday 13th.” It is OK + if the balance of the story is as good (+ I have no doubts on that score) you are “It” when it comes to writting fiction as well as tricking the Insurance Thief + Standard Oil Grafters.

Wishing you success I am yours very truly S. F. Welch




Rumford Falls, Maine, November 20, 1906.

Mr. Tom Lewson, Boston, Mass.

Dear Sir:

I have read all your writings in Everybody’s, including the first installment of your story in the December number, and I must say that I am more than pleased with it. As a writer of fiction you are sure to make another big hit.
