


For Frank this pleasant English village was now a happy _fete_ of summer joys and occupations. Oh! the hill prospects and the shady gardens around the coasts. And when he went inland he would return by choice across the Downs, and in the patriarchal valleys where nothing is heard but the bell-wether he would stand in the great, lonely darkness, and see the lights of Brighton brighten the sky above the ridges, and climbing up the ridges, he gazed on the vague sea, and the long string of coast towns were like a golden necklace.

His days went like dreams. The morning hours--bachelor hours--were full of intimacy and joy. The joy of waking alone with a strange and secret self that, like a shy bird, is all the day chased out of sight and hearing, but is with you when you awake in sweet health in the morning; that of waking alone with the sunlight in the curtains, that of being alone with your body as well as your mind, and no presence to jar the communion. There is a dear privacy in morning hours of single life.

But although the desire to exchange these for the joys of wedlock was germinating in Frank, although it was inherent in him to understand the husband's happiness when he puts his arm round a dear wife's neck and draws her to him with marital kisses and affectionate words, he was certainly conscious that each hour seemed to bring its special pleasure. His room was airy and pleasant, the window full of the colour of the green and its aspects; the little water-course with its brick bridge, the trees along the embankment, the rigging of the ships in the harbour, the linen drying in the yard. Of these views Frank seemed never to grow tired; he noted them as he brushed his brown curls over his forehead, and when he sat at breakfast eating fresh eggs and marmalade. After breakfast he lay on the sofa, and read society papers and smoked cigarettes. He could not drag himself to the studio. "A man should live at his studio, impossible to settle down to work, if he doesn't," he thought, and he watched Mrs. Horlock coming up the green accompanied by the chemist's wife and the pugs.

"Dear old lady, how nice she looks in her black dress and poke bonnet! And there goes the General--he is giving all his coppers to the children."

Frank took up a volume of Browning, turned over the leaves, and laid the book down to watch a drove of horses that had suddenly been turned out on the green to feed, and he laughed to see the children throwing stones, making them gallop frantically. Very often the thunder of the hoofs alarmed Triss, and he stood on his hind legs and barked. "What is it, old dog? What is it? Like to have a go at the horses? Shall we go out and play with the pugs?" At the mention of going out Triss cocked his ears and barked. "I suppose I must make a move. I wonder what the time is--half-past eleven. Good Heavens! The post will be here at twelve. I had better wait for it." On waking his first thoughts were for his letters, and almost before he had finished reading them he had begun to think of what the mid-day delivery would bring him. To see the boy pass and so have ocular proof that there was nothing for him seemed to lighten his disappointment. He saw him waste his time with the doctor's horse and then with the maid-servant, and if the old ladies were not about he would stand talking many minutes with their servants. Then he visited the short line of cottages, passed sometimes round the yard or open space at the back of the wheelwright's, where the linen hung on poles between the elms, and once Frank saw the provoking boy hide behind the cricketers' tent and remain watching the match. For half an hour the question--letters or no letters--hung in suspense, and when the loiterer came, stopping every minute to see where the ball was hit to, the joy, heightened by anticipation, was great in receiving a packet of newspapers and various correspondence. Frank often went to meet him. True, he might have nothing for him, he might be going to deliver at the grocer's shop, or at the "Cricketer's Arms."

"Any letters for me, to-day?"

"Yes, sir, two postcards and a newspaper."

It was disappointing not to get a letter--postcards meant nothing. He only exchanged a few words with Mrs. Horlock, and passed on to the General, who, at the corner of the Southdown Road where the gossipers met, was discussing a local candidature.

"So you are off to paint. You must come and see the model my wife has done of a horse I once had. I mustn't say much about him, though--it is a sore subject. After winning over a thousand with him I lost it all, and five hundred with it. She never would paint his picture for me; but yesterday was my birthday--I suppose she thought she would give me a treat, she began to model him from memory--wonderful likeness--she knows every bone and sinew in a horse--clever woman, never seen any one like her. Come in to-night, dinner always at eight--old Indians. She'll show it to you."

"Thanks, not to-night, General; to-morrow night, if you like."

"Very well, to-morrow night at eight. What a terrible dog that is of yours! You need fear nobody while you have him with you. You must ask my wife to paint him for you, but I forgot, I beg your pardon--you are a painter; you should paint him yourself."

"I don't paint animals. I shall be very glad if Mrs. Horlock will paint him; there is some beautiful drawing about him--those fore-legs."

Probably attracted by the dog, Mrs. Horlock came walking towards them. Triss went sidling after Rose, and when Mrs. Horlock called him, he growled.

"I beg of you, Mrs. Horlock, do not touch him; he isn't safe, I assure you. He once bit a man's nose off who was trying to train him to do something or other. I will not be answerable."

"All nonsense! No dog ever bit me, they know I love them. 'Come to me, sir.' No dog ever bit me but once, and he was a poor mongrel that had been hunted by a lot of horrid men. I was dressing to go to a ball at the Government House, and I heard him under my bed. He had taken refuge under my bed, poor thing. He was frightened to death; he couldn't see me, and he bit me through the wrist. I went to the ball all the same. A dog died of hydrophobia in my arms. He died like a child, licking my hands and face. 'Come here, sir. Come to me.'"

"I wish you wouldn't do it, Mrs. Horlock. I am afraid to call him, for fear he should think I intended to set him at you."

Triss showed a terrible set of teeth, and his nose seemed to curl back almost into his eyes; but stooping down Mrs. Horlock extended her hands to him. She looked so like herself in the poke bonnet and the black dress, and the kind, intelligent eyes softened the dog's humour, and he came to her.

"You see--what did I tell you? Dogs know so well those that love them. No animal ever did bite me except that poor frightened creature, and he didn't mean it. We kept him for ten years after that, and how he did love me!"

"Wonderful woman, my wife; she can do what she likes with animals. I was telling Mr. Escott that he must come in and see the model you are making of Snap-dragon."

"Only an amateur, I never had a lesson in my life. Mr. Escott would think nothing of it, I am sure. But I wish he'd come in and dine with us."

"He promised to come to-morrow, Lucy; but stay, isn't that the day we are going to have the Bath people in to dine?"

"Never mind--Mr. Escott won't mind, I'm sure. They are very nice, good people, indeed. I'm sure you'll think so. They are all snobs about this place. I never heard of such snobbery in my life. Mrs. So-and-so--over there--once said to me, 'I believe you know all the people who live in those little houses.' She said she wouldn't allow her children even to walk across the green. Did you ever hear of such snobbery?"

"Well, Mrs. Horlock, as I have always said, your position is made; you have your friends who will like you and value you just the same no matter whom you may walk about the green with. Every Viceroy that ever went to India called on you; your position is made."

"There are a lot of snobs about here; but I mustn't keep Angel waiting, he is never well unless he gets a little exercise. We shall see you then at eight."

"The cleverest woman I ever knew. I don't say the cleverest that you ever knew. But we have got too many animals; I often wish I could get rid of the brutes," and the General laughed as he stumped along. "Five horses when two would be sufficient--five horses eating their heads off; then the Circassian goats that the neighbours complain of, and the parrots and the squirrels. There are a few too many, there's no doubt. But once an animal comes into the place she will cherish it for ever. I try to keep Prince out of the drawing-room as much as possible, she says she can't smell him. If that little beast Angel would only die!"

"Why don't you poison him?"

"I would if I dared; but just think, if my wife heard of it she would go out of her mind. I don't think she'd have me in the house." The General laughed.

"We all have our troubles, General. Good-bye, I'm off to work."

"Lucky man to have something to do. If I had a little something--just a little something to bring me out, I should be perfectly happy. Then at eight. Good-bye."

"Half-past twelve! Half the day gone, I really must make an effort to get to the studio earlier. It is, as I said, useless to hope to get through work unless you wake up where your work is. A man doesn't get a chance. I wonder if I could build a bedroom out at the back? I have let Mount Rorke in for three hundred extra this year; he would turn rusty if I spent any more. I must give him a rest; besides, I don't want to have the workmen in again. I wish I could get ivy to grow over those walls, they do look precious shabby."

He looked at the tall dilapidated walls showing above the dark green of the elder bushes, and lingered, for it was a soft blue summer's day with just a breeze stirring, and the corn waved yellow, and the dim expanses of the Downs extended in faint lines and dim tints.

When he entered his studio his colour scheme pleased him, and looking at the rafters he thought that the stained wood was handsome and appropriate. The grey carpet was soft under foot, and the lustre and form of a grand piano suggested Chopin and Schubert. His studio seemed to him a symbol of his own refinement, and being moved, perhaps, by the silence and the quiet of the north light, he took his violin, and turning from time to time to look on himself on the glass or his picture on the easel, he played Stradella's "Chanson d'Eglise."

Then seeing, or rather thinking he saw, how he could improve his landscape, he took up his palette, and in a desultory and uncertain fashion he painted till five o'clock. "It is no use," he thought, "I can do nothing with it until I get a model, but the devil of it is, there are no models in Brighton--at least, I don't know where to go and look for one, and it is no use asking Sally or Maggie to sit. They'll sit for five minutes, and then say they have some work to do at home, and must be off. You must have a professional model, a girl you pay a shilling an hour--I might sling the hammock from there to here--I wonder where I could get a girl who would do. I can't have a girl off the street; she must be more or less respectable--I wonder whom I can get. That girl in the bar-room at the station would do." Putting his palette away with a lazy gesture, he thought for a few minutes of Lizzie Baker. What had become of her? And why had she disappeared?

It was nearly a year and a half ago now. What a jolly day up the river! All the beauty of the flowing water, the crowning woods and whispering rushes filled his mind, and yielding to the moment's emotion he took some verses out of an escritoire and altered several lines. Another abandoning the search for a suitable rhyme he turned to a portrait of Maggie which he had begun a few days before. She stood in a pose that was habitual to her--her hands linked behind her, the head leaned on one side, the little black eyes--but not ugly eyes--fixed in a sweet subtle and enquiring look. The thinness, and, indeed, the angularity of her figure was almost powerfully indicated with broad lines of paint and charcoal. It was Frank's most successful effort. He knew this, and he said to himself, "Not half bad, very like her, quite the character; the drawing is right, if I could only go on with it; if I could only model the face. I see very well where I shall get into trouble--that shadow about the neck, the jawbone, the cheekbone, and then all that rich colour about the eyes." Then he thought he would walk over to the Manor House, and he must hasten, for it was half-past five, and tea was always ready in the verandah.

He stayed for dinner; he talked to Mr. Brookes about painters in the billiard-room; he strayed through the shadows and the perfumes of leaves and flowers through the gentle moonlight with his arms about the girls. And as they walked it seemed to Frank that his life was so mingled with theirs that he could not think of one sister apart from the other. The dusk gathered; the sky became a decoration in blue and gold; the scent of the sea came over the embankment, filling the garden. Day followed day, without anything happening to stay or check the gentle tide of their mutual affections; neither was jealous of her sister, for their desires were set upon others. Frank was but an ideal, a repose, a pious aspiration which joined their hands and hearts leaving them free of any stress of passion, Maggie claiming him a little more than Sally, and Sally yielding her claim to her without knowing that she was yielding it.

It is only natures that are never gross--calm and tepid livers--that are really incapable of ideality, of real and adequate aspiration; nature works by flux and reflux; and if we waive the rough temper and the coarse edge of passion due to youth, it will not be impossible to conceive another picture of these girls. Sally, good-hearted and true, full of sturdy, homely sense, willing to take care of a man's money, and make him a straightforward wife; Maggie, gentle and sinuating--always a little false, but always attractive, the enchantment of a man's home. Frank, notwithstanding his genuine admiration of all that was young and sweet and pure, was of poor and separating fibre, and it is clear that it will take all the strength of society to support him and save him from sinking of his own weight.

One day, as he was coming through the station from the post-office, he met Maggie with a young man. He was introduced, and they returned to the Manor House to play tennis. Instead of playing they talked, and the set fell through, and after tea they disappeared, and Sally proposed not to disturb them, for they had gone, she said, to sit in the shade at the end of the garden. The marked mystery of the new flirtation piqued Frank's curiosity, and, striving to veil his question, he asked Sally who the young man was, and if her father knew he was coming to the Manor House.

"He! Don't you know? That's the fellow we often speak of--the only fellow Maggie ever really cared for. He has just come back from America. He is going to begin business in London."

A sickening pain rose from his heart to his eyes, and he longed to place his hand on his heart.

"So that is the man she is engaged to," he said, after a pause. "I remember, now, you have spoken to me of him."

"She is not exactly engaged to him. Father would never hear of it; he hasn't a cent, and I believe he lost the little he had in America--now mind you must take care not to let out to father that he has been here; there would be the deuce of a row, and I promised Maggie not to tell any one; she has been nice to me lately, and I want to play fair with her if she will play fair with me."

"Oh, I won't tell any one; I won't even let Maggie know that I know it was he."

"It doesn't matter about Maggie, she will tell you herself, no doubt; she doesn't mind your knowing. What do you think of him? Isn't he nice-looking?"

"I confess I should never have thought of calling him handsome--would you? And do you think he is quite a gentleman?"

"He seems to me to be all right."

"All right, yes, but isn't there a something? You can see he is in trade--all the trading people look alike, at least so I think."

"But we are in trade, and I think he is quite as good as we are. But you seem quite put out. Would you like to take his place? I didn't know you were in love with Maggie."

"I don't know that I am in love with her. I like her very much; but, love or no love, I don't think it is right for her to walk round the garden alone with that fellow the whole afternoon. I don't think it is very polite to me, and she knows her father does not like--"

"But you mustn't say anything to father; mind you have promised me."

"Oh, I shan't say anything about it."

Frank longed to get up from the tea-table and rush after Maggie. His heart ached to see her. He trembled lest she loved the man she was with, and rejoiced and took courage from the knowledge that she had not formally pledged herself to him. Frank was the romantic husband, not the lover; he found neither charm nor excitement in change; his heart demanded one single, avowed, and binding faith. He could take a woman who had sinned to his heart, and admit her to all his trust, for stolen kisses and illicit love were unfelt and imperfectly understood by him, and were considered as shadows and thin fancies, and not as facts full of mental consequences. He answered Sally in monosyllables, and on the first opportunity he pleaded letters to write, and withdrew. The gladness he felt that Maggie was truly not engaged to this fellow quickened and dominated his regret that the girls were inclined to behave so indiscreetly. The moment Mr. Brookes turned his back it began--that perpetual going and coming of men--it really wasn't right. Sally was a coarser nature, but Maggie! He might speak to Mr. Brookes; no, that wouldn't do. He might speak to Willy; but Willy didn't care--he was absorbed in his wife and his speculations.

His little dinner at Mrs. Heald's passed in irritation and discomfort, and after dinner he stood at the window, his brain full of Maggie--her graces, her fascinating cunning, and all her picturesqueness. He knew nothing yet of his passion, nor did he think he could not bear to lose her until he went from the stuffy cottage towards his studio thinking of his portrait of her. He wanted to muse on the little eyes as he had rendered them. He saw the faults in the drawing hardly at all, and his pain softened and almost ceased when he took up the violin, but when he put it down the flow of subjective emotion ceased, and he stared on the concrete and realistic image of his thought--Maggie passing through the shade with the young stranger.

Who was he? By whose authority was he there? Was he one of those men whose only pleasure is to tempt girls, to corrupt them? Had he thought of this before his duty would have been to interpose; and he saw himself striding down the garden and telling Maggie that he insisted on her coming back to the verandah to her sister. It did not matter if he had no right, he was prepared to answer for his conduct to her father and brother. Did that man look like one of those men who are always sitting with girls in far corners out of sight? Ah, if he were sure that he was one of those dastardly ruffians he would seek him out, force him to speak his intentions. If a girl's father and brother will not look after her, a friend must say "I will." Yes, he would have to thrash him, kill him, if it were necessary. She might hate him for it at first, but in the end she would recognise him as her saviour.

It was too late now, the man was in Brighton. To-morrow? Elated with what he deemed "duty," with what he deemed "for the sake of the girl," he strode about, thinking of "the ruffian"; no thought came to him of how much of the sin, if sin there was, had originated in Maggie; he saw her merely as a poor little thing, led like a lamb. Following the idea of saving came the idea of possession. When she clung to the husband she would tremble at the danger she had escaped. Their home, their table, their fireside; protection from evil, now all wild winds might rage--they would be safe. The vision was constitutional and characteristic of his soul. He was out of thought of all but himself, his dream evolved in pure idea, removed from and independent of all limitations--out of concern of the world's favour--Mount Rorke, Mr. Brookes, or even the girl's grace. As this temper passed, as reality again interposed, and as he saw the garden with Maggie leaving him for another, he viewed her conduct suddenly in relation to himself. What did she mean by treating him so, and for whom? One day he would be Lord Mount Rorke! The Brookes knew nobody. He had only met a lot of cads at their house; they did not know any one but cads. The Brookes were cads! The father was a vulgar old City man, who talked about money and bought ridiculous pictures. The girls, too, were vulgar and coarse. God only knew how many lovers they had not had. Willy was the best of the bunch, but he was a fool. His miserliness and his vegetable shop--hateful! The whole place was hateful; he wished he had never come there; since he had been there he had never been treated even as a gentleman. The Brookes had treated him shamefully.

The skeleton of Frank's soul is easy to trace in this mental crisis--his quixotism, his wish to sally forth and save women, his yearning for a pretty little wife, who would sit on his knee and kiss him, saying, "Poor old boy, you are tired now;" therefore an emotional and distorted apprehension of things, a tendency to think himself a wronged and persecuted person, and under much bravado and swagger the cringe that is so inveterate in the Celt.

Next morning he thought of her lightly, without bitterness and almost without desire; but after breakfast his heart began to ache again. He strove to read, he went to his studio, he went to Brighton; but he saw Maggie in all things. She was with him--a sort of vague pain that kept him strangely conscious of life.

Once convinced he was a lover he became the man with a mission; his heart swelled with mysterious promptings, and felt the spur of duty. No longer was delay admissible. A day, an hour might involve the loss of all. Should he go round to the Manor House and tell Maggie of the message he had received to love her and save her? She would now be watering her flowers in the green-houses. But that other fellow might be there--he had heard something about an appointment. No, he had better write. If he wrote at once, absolutely at once, he would be in time for the six o'clock delivery. Snatching a sheet of paper he wrote:--

"DEAREST MAGGIE,--I have loved you a long while, I remember many things that make me think that I have always loved you; but to-day I have learnt that you are the one great and absorbing influence--that without you my life would be stupid and meaningless, whereas with you it shall be a joy, an achievement.

"I have frittered away much time; my efforts in painting and poetry have been lacking in strength and persistency. I have vacillated and wandered, and I did not know why; but now I know why--because you were not by me to encourage me, to help me by your presence and beauty. I will not speak of the position I offer you--I know it is unworthy of you. I would like to give you a throne; but, alas, I can but promise you a coronet."

His hand stopped and he raised his eyes from the paper. He recollected the day he saw her a child, the day they went blackberrying over the hills. He saw her again, she was older and prettier, and she wore a tailor-cut cloth dress. How pretty she looked that day, and also when she wore that summer dress, those blue ribbons. All the colour, innocence, and mirth of his childhood came upon him sweetly, like an odour that passes and recalls. He sighed, and he murmured, "She is mine by right, all this could not have been if she were not for me." Ah! how he longed to sit with her, even at her feet, and tell her how his life would be but worship of her. He regretted that he was not poor, for to unite himself more closely to her he would have liked to win her clothes and food by his labour; and hearing himself speaking of love and seeing her as a maiden with the May time about her, his dreams drifted until the ticking of the clock forced him to remember that he could tell her nothing now of all his romance, so with pain and despair at heart he wrote,

"Never before did I so ardently feel the necessity of seeing you, of sharing my soul with you, and yet now is the moment when I say, I must end. But let this end be the beginning of our life of love, devotion, and trust. I will come to-night to see you; I will not go into the billiard-room, but will walk straight to the drawing-room. Do be there. Dearest Maggie, I am yours and yours only."

He seized his hat and rushed to the post. He was in time, and now that the step had been taken, he walked back looking more than usually handsome and tall, pleased to see the children run out of school and roll on the grass, pleased to linger with the General.

"Where are you going, sir?" said the old man.

"I'm going to my studio to play the fiddle. Will you come? I'll give you a glass of sherry, and--"

"Never touch anything, except at meals. I used to when I was as young as you, but not now. But I will go and hear a little music."

Glad to have a companion, Frank took out the violin, and he played all the melodies he knew; and his mind ran chiefly on Schubert and Gounod. The "Soir," the "Printemps," and "La Chanson du Printemps" carried his soul away, nor could he forbear to sing when he came to the phrase, "La Neige des Pommiers." When musical emotion ran dry he tried painting, but with poor result. During dinner he grew fevered and eager to see Maggie, and mad to tell her that he loved her, and could love none but her. At half-past eight the torture of suspense was more than he could endure, and he decided that he would go to the Manor House. He passed round the block of cottages, and got into the path that between the palings led through the meadows. It was a soft summer evening--moonlight and sunset played in gentle antagonism, and in a garden hat he saw Maggie coming towards him. He noticed the pink shawl about her shoulders, and the thought struck him, "had she come to ask him to elope." She stopped, and she hesitated as if she were going to turn back again.

"Oh, I am so sorry," she said, speaking with difficulty, "but I wanted you to get this before nine."

"Never mind, darling," he answered, smiling; "you can tell me all about it--it will be sweeter to hear you talk. Which way shall we go?"

"I really don't think I can now; father doesn't know I am out. This letter will--"

"No, no; I cannot bear to part with you. How pretty you look in that hat! Come."

"No, Frank, I cannot now, and you had better leave me. I cannot walk with you to-night. Read this letter."

"Then am I--is it really so?" said Frank, growing suddenly pale. "You will not have me?"

"You must read this letter, it will tell you all. I am truly sorry, but I did not know you cared for me--at least not like that. I don't think I could, I really don't. But I don't know what I am saying. How unfortunate it was meeting you. I but thought to run round and leave the letter, it would have explained all better than I could. We have known you so long. You will forgive me?"

She stood with the letter in her hand. He snatched it a little theatrically and tore it open. She watched, striving to read the effect of her words in his face. They dealt in regrets. There was an exasperating allusion to engaged affections. There was a long and neatly-worded conclusion suggesting friendship. She had taken a great deal of trouble with the composition, and was very fearful as to the result. She felt she could not marry him--at least, not just at present, she didn't know why. Altogether Frank's proposal had puzzled and distressed her. She felt she must see her flirtation out with Charlie, but at the same time she did not want to utterly lose Frank, or worse still, perhaps, to hand him over to Sally. She was determined that Sally should not be Lady Mount Rorke, and she thrilled a little when she saw he would not give her up easily, and her heart sank when she thought of the difficulty of continuing her intrigue without prejudicing her future. If Frank would only leave Southwick for a little while.

"Is this all? The meaning is clear enough; it means that you love the man I saw yesterday at the Manor House. But he shall not have you; I will save you from him. Listen to me--I swear he shall not have you; I will strive to outwit him by every means in my power. If I don't get you, none shall. I will shoot the man rather than he should get you."

"O Frank, you wouldn't commit murder!"

"I would, for you; but it will not be necessary. I can challenge him to fight a duel, and if he is cowardly enough to refuse, I will horsewhip him before your face, and I don't suppose you will marry him after that."

Maggie struggled with feelings of laughter, fear, and delight; delight overpowered laughter, for Frank was young and handsome, and full of what he said. It was quite romantic to be talked to like that. She would like to see the men threaten each other. But then--the scandal--father might never get over it. And if he married again? Speaking slowly, and in an undertone so as not to betray herself, she said: "O Frank, I'm sure you would not do anything that would injure me."

"My darling, I love you better than the whole world. My whole life, if you will, shall be spent in striving to make you happy."

"You are very good." She took his hand and squeezed it; he returned the pressure with rapturous look and motion. She drew from him a little, for there were some people coming towards them, and she said: "Take care." When the fisher folk had passed, she looked at him stealthily. She had always liked him in that necktie, and those cloth shoes were perfect. Had she never known Charlie, or if she had not gone so far with him!--There was something in Frank that was very nice--she could like the two. What a pity the two were not one! "If he were always as nice as he is now, and not lecture me!" Then she remembered she must return home. "I must really go home; I can't go any farther--"

"No, no, I cannot leave you. I must see and hear you now. If you knew what I have endured waiting for you, you would not be so cruel. Come and let us sit on the beach."

"I couldn't. I must go back; father will miss me. Besides, what have we to say? If I were only free and could tell you that I loved you, it would be different."

"Free! then you regret; if a woman wills it she can always free herself."

"No, it is harder than you think for a girl to get out of an engagement she has entered into, even if no absolute promise has been given."

"What do you mean? If you have entered into no formal engagement you are surely free."

"I don't know. Do you think so? I am afraid men think that a promise may be broken after marriage as well as before."

"You are wrong. Women who are jealous, who are old, tell girls that men are always unfaithful, but I'm sure that if I loved a girl I could never think of another. Do you really think I could think of any girl but you?"

"I don't know. I wonder if all you say is true."

"Do you think me different from other men?"

"Yes, but I cannot go on the beach; some other evening I will walk there with you."

"No, now, now--I want to tell you how and when I began to love. Do you remember when I used to spend part of my holidays at the Manor House when I was only so high, and you were all in short frocks? Come, there is much I want to say to you; I cannot part with you. Come, and let us sit on the shingle. Oh, the beautiful evening!"

She could love him a little when she looked at him, but when he talked she lost interest in him. She had allowed him to take her hand, he had bent towards her, and she had let him kiss her; and then they talked of love--she of its bitterness and disappointments; he of its aspirations, and gradually their souls approached like shadows in the twilight, paused for a few vague moments, seemed as if lost in dreams.

"I shall never forget this night! O my love, tell me one day you will be mine!"

"I cannot promise, you must not ask me."

"We are meant for each other. It was not blind fate that cast us together. Does no voice tell you this? I hear it in my heart."

The abandonment, the mystery of the gathering dusk, touched Maggie's fancy. They were alone in the twilight, and it was full of the romance of a rising tide.

"Never did I know such happiness; I am supremely happy, alone with you beneath this sky, listening to the vague, wild voice of the sea. It would be bitter sweet to die in such a triumphant hour. Supposing wewere to lie here and allow the sea to take us away."

"No, I don't want to die. I want to live and enjoy my life."

The answer fell a little chillingly on Frank's rapture. Then after a pause, Maggie said: "I think I have read of that somewhere--in anovel--lovers caught by the tide."

"Yes, I daresay you have. I was thinking of two lovers who were so overcome with happiness that they decided that they would not trust themselves again to the waves and storms of life, but would let the calm, slow tide of death take them away with all their happiness unassoiled."

Maggie did not answer. The double fear had come upon her--first, that the tide might rise higher than usual and cut off their retreat. Secondly, that Frank--he was a poet--might insist on remaining there and being drowned. Getting up, she said: "I do not know what father will say when I get home, really it is quite dark. Come, Frank."

"Death is better than a life of abomination--loss of innocence, and of delight in simple things. I ask you," he said, stopping her suddenly.

"Yes, no doubt it is so; but I want to get home. Do go on, Frank."

"I will save you from a life of abomination--in other words I will save you from him; he shall not get you. I have sworn it; you did notknow that when you were lying down on the beach--you had ceased speaking, and in the silence my life seemed stirred to its very essence; and I knew that I must struggle against him, and conquer. I want to know this: Have you ever thought of what your life would be with him? Have you ever thought what he is?"

"But you don't know him, Frank. You have never spoken to him. I am sure you misjudge him."

"Do you think I cannot see what he is? He is one of those men whose one ambition is to make themselves friendly in a house where there are women to wheedle. If the wife is young he will strive to wheedle her, and though he may not succeed he must degrade her. Or, if she have daughters, he will never cease to appeal to, to work upon, to excite latent feelings which, had it not been for him, would never have been developed into base and abnormal desire. I know what the foul-minded beast is. Such men as he ought to be killed; we don't want them in our society. I want to save you, I want to give you a noble, a pure life, full of the charms of a husband's influence, a home where there would be love of natural things. You are capable of all this, Maggie, your nature is a pure one, but your life is unwholesome and devoid of purity."

"Frank, how can you speak so? You have no right to say such things about us. I am sure you have always been well treated--"

"You do not understand me, I will explain what I mean. Your life is rich and luxurious, but you are not happy, no one is happy in idleness; above all no woman is happy without love. A woman's mission in life is to love, she must have her home, her husband, and her children. These are the things that make a woman happy; and these are the things I want to give you--that I will give you; for, listen to me, I swear you shall not have that adventurer. He would degrade you with pleasure at first, and afterwards with neglect. You are too good for this, Maggie--it must not be, it shall not be. As I said before, death would be better." They stood in front of the canal locks and Maggie looked with a beating heart on the deep water that a ray from a crescent moon faintly indicated. "A woman is helpless until she finds her lord, he who shall save, the saviour who shall bring her home safe to the fold. He exists! and all are in danger till they find him. Some miss him--they wander into misery and ruin; those that find him are led to happiness and content. I am yours. I would tell you how I became convinced that I am the one appointed by God to lead you to Him."

"I thought you didn't believe in God."

"Not as we have been taught to understand Him but I believe in a presiding power--call it luck, fate, or destiny that--that exists and wills; that is to say, watches over--rules out that this man is for that woman, and ordains that he shall protect her from danger, shall save her from those that seek her destruction. Much has happened to prove that I was intended for you. We have known each other since we were children. Do you not remember when I kissed you in the verandah as I was going to school? I was the first man who kissed you; you were the first woman who kissed me--have you never felt that we were for each other? Nor can I forget that when I thought we had drifted for ever apart, that I was brought back. Do you think it was accident--blind chance? I don't. Now I see this man striving to win you, and whether it be for your money, whether it be for yourself, or for both, it is my duty to say: No, this must not be."

"I think you are mistaken about Charlie. I admit that a man is often a better judge than a girl; and as for you, Frank, I am sure I am very fond of you. It is very good of you to take such interest in me--but we must get home. I don't know what father will think."

"No, before you go a step further you must promise me not to see that man again. I cannot tell you how, but I know no good can come of it. He is one of those creatures who cannot love, and only care for women for the excitement they afford. I know what sort of brute he is. It is more depraving to walk alone with him, than to be the mistress of a man who loved you."

"He is leaving Brighton in a few days."

"So much the better for all of us. But you must promise me. I would sooner see you lying drowned in that lock than his wife."

Maggie trembled. It was ridiculous to think of such a thing. Surely he did not mean to drown her if she refused to promise. Charlie was going to London in a few days; he would be away for three or four months. Heaven only knows what would happen in that time. She didn't see what right Frank had to bully her--to extort promises from her by night on the edge of a dangerous lock. But a promise wasn't much, and a promise given in such circumstances was not a promise at all.

"If you are really in earnest--if you think it is for my good, I'll promise you not to see him again."

"O Maggie, if you only knew what a load of trouble you have taken off my mind! Thank you--give me your hand, and let me thank you. I know I am right. And now, tell me, can you love me? Will you marry me?"

"I will promise nothing more to-night; we shall see how you behave yourself," the girl replied winningly. "And now go on, sir, we have been here quite long enough."

He crossed the gate mechanically, she followed eagerly, and when she reached the other side her heart beat with pride at her pretty triumph. Now I'll twit him, she thought, as they ascended the shore and entered the town.

"I wonder why you think Charlie so wicked; I think if you knew him you would change your opinion."

"I am very thankful indeed that I do not know him."

The conversation dropped, but a moment after he gave her the chance she wanted.

"Mind you have promised me not to see him again. I trust you."

"But suppose he calls and if I should be in the drawing-room, I cannot walk out of the room without speaking to him."

"I think you had better write and say you do not wish to see him."

"I couldn't do that; we have known him a long time, and father has always said that we must be rude to no one. Besides, what reason could I give?"

"You need not give a reason. But let that pass. I can't see why you should meet; you can surely tell your servant to say 'Not at home,' when he calls."

"I might be in the garden--Sally would not allow it. If John said 'Not at home,' she would run down and let him in."

"I see you are raising difficulties--I see you do not intend to keep your promise."

"You have been quite rude enough for one evening. You have kept me out on the beach by force till nearly ten o'clock at night, and you said that my life at the Manor House was not a pure one--I don't know what you mean. No man ever spoke to me like that before."

"You misunderstood me. If you knew how I loved you, you would not twit me with my own words. Heaven knows I would sooner go back and drown myself in the lock than do anything or say anything that would offend you. Remember also that I asked you to be my wife."

"You are not the first. I daresay it may appear strange to you, but others have asked me the same question before."

"It does not seem strange to me, it only seems strange to me that every one doesn't love you, but I daresay they do. O Maggie, remember that you gave me hope, you said that you might--"

"Did I? Well, it's too late to talk any more. Goodnight. I suppose you're not coming in?"

She left him in a cruel dispersal of hope. He avoided, and then he tenderly solicited a regret that he had not thrown her into the lock. To end on that hour by the sea would have been better than the trivial and wretched conclusion of a broken promise, and everything, even murder, were better than that a brute should have her woman's innocence to sully and destroy. His love of the woman disappeared in his desire to save, the idea which she represented at that moment; and lost in sentiment he stood watching the white sickle of the moon over against the dim village. The leaves of some pollarded willows whitened when the breeze shot them up to the light, and a moment after became quite distinct in the glare and the steam of an approaching engine. He might go and tell Willy all about it; he would ask him to interfere-could he catch that train? If he ran for it, yes. He ran full tilt across the green under the archway up the high stone steps. He just did it.

It was the last train; he would sleep in Brighton. His plan, so far as he had a definite plan, was to ask Willy to come with him and tell "that brute" that his visits to the Manor House must end, and request him to pay his sister no further attentions. His other plans were--Willy must speak to Maggie and tell her all he knew of the man; Willy must speak to his father; Mr. Brookes must not be kept in ignorance. But of course the right thing to do would be for Willy and him to call at the brute's hotel, tell him what they thought, and give him a licking. The train jogged on, and Frank made plan after plan. It was now past eleven, and he would not be at East Street before twelve o'clock. As he hurried along the streets he doubted more than ever how Willy would receive him. He might just as well have waited till morning. However, it was too late now to think of going back, there was no train, and he rapped at first timidly and then noisily at the shop door. He had to wait some time, and then he heard a voice asking from the top windows who was there.

"'Tis I, Frank; awfully sorry, but must see you--particular business."

There was no answer; he heard the voice grumbling, and more than ever doubtful of the cordiality of his reception, he listened. The door opened.

"Who is it?" he said.

"'Tis I, Cissy; but I'm in my nightdress."

"I won't look at you, Cissy, if that's what you mean. But won't yougive me a kiss?"

"Stoop down, then."

"I am sorry for waking you up, Cissy."

"Never mind, I'd get up at any hour to see you."

"There, run upstairs, and take care you don't catch cold, or I shall never hear the end of it."

"Father is in bed with mother. He says you are to go up, for if he were to get out of bed it might give him cold. You know his room?"

"Yes, here it is, now run along."

"Come in."

Frank was a little shocked, and he waited stupidly on the threshold. He could see a fragment of Mrs. Brookes's profile, and beneath the clothes the outline of Willy's bony body.

"Come in, come in," he said, "don't stand there filling the room with cold air. Now, what is it? Why the deuce do you come here waking us up at this ungodly hour? What has happened?"

"I have proposed to your sister Maggie."

"I am sure I am delighted to hear it, old chap; but I can't help thinking that I could have congratulated you equally as well, if not better, in the morning." Then, noticing the distressed look in Frank's face, he said: "I hope she has not refused you."

"No; she asked me to wait, she said it would depend--"

"Then you may depend it is all right; now go away and let me go to sleep, we'll talk about it in the morning. You can't get back to-night. You are sleeping in Brighton, I suppose? You'll come and breakfast here?"

"Yes, with pleasure, but it wasn't exactly to tell that I had proposed to Maggie that I came here to-night; there is something more than that. You know that fellow she calls Charlie? I don't know his other name."

"Stracey?"

"I dare say. I mean the man you said you hated more than any man alive; I hate him, too."

"You don't mean to say she is still thinking of that fellow. Has he come back?"

"He was at the Manor House all day yesterday."

"If she marries that fellow I'll never speak to her again, it will be dead cuts."

"It is only natural that I should love Maggie. You remember the first day I came down to the Manor House? How young I was then--how young we all were; there are no days like the old days! There is a beautiful poem by Wordsworth; I only remember one line now--

    "'When every day was long        As twenty days are now'--

Do you remember the poem?" Willy did not answer, and noticing that his eyes were blinking, Frank hastily returned to more recent events." I wrote to her this afternoon telling her how much I loved her, and I said that I would call about nine in the evening at the Manor House, and that I hoped to find her in the drawing-room where we could talk without being disturbed. However, I was too excited, and could not hold out till nine; I thought I had better hear my fate at once, and as I was walking across the field--you know, at the back of Mrs. Heald's--I met her half way. She had a letter in her hand, which she said she was going to leave at Mrs. Heald's for me--She admitted that the letter was in point of fact a refusal, and when I questioned her she admitted that she was obliged to refuse me because she had half promised Charlie. We went for a walk on the beach; we sat on the beach and watched the sunset, and I told her all. I spoke to her about the past, how we had grown up together--how we had been, as it were, from the first fated for each other; for you must admit, Willy, that it is very curious--I don't know if you ever think of it, but I do--how we have met again even when the chances of life seemed to have put us for ever apart. "Here a slight sound warned Frank that the present moment was one as equally unfitted for psychological analysis as for poetry, and he hurried to his story, hoping that the incident of the lock would secure him attention. "Willy, I think I convinced her that I liked her better than that other fellow. We were standing by the lock--Willy, I really do think you might listen."

"My dear fellow, I am listening. You were both looking at the sunset."

"It really is too bad. Of course, if you don't want to hear, and would prefer to go to sleep, you have only to say so."

"My dear fellow, I assure you I wasn't asleep. I only closed my eyes because I can't bear the glare of that candle. I know where you were--you were looking at the sunset."

"No, we weren't."

"Weren't they, Jessie? Are you asleep?"

"No, I am not asleep. Do hold your tongue, Willy, I want to hear the story. You were standing by the lock, Mr. Escott."

"Ah, yes, so they were."

"I felt it was my duty, so I told her that I felt it was my mission to save--to save her from that man, and I made her promise me not to see him again."

"Then it is all right. Nobody can be more glad than I am. I hate the fellow."

"She will not keep her promise. Of course she may only have done it to tease me; but as we were going home she said she could not walk out of the room if she happened to be there when he called, nor could she leave word with the servants to say that they were not at home. She made a lot of excuses. What are you laughing at, Mrs. Brookes?"

"I am really very sorry, Mr. Escott, but I couldn't help wondering if she would change her mind again if you were to go back to the lock."

Frank took up the candle and turned to go.

"Don't go," Willy murmured faintly.

"I am very sorry, Mr. Escott--if circumstances permitted, I would do all I could to help you."

This was delicate ground, and Willy woke up.

"What do you want me to do? Have you anything to suggest?"

"Yes, it struck me that we might both go round to the fellow's hotel--Stracey, you call him, I think--and you might tell him that his visits must cease at the Manor House, and that he must not speak to your sister if he should happen to meet her. That should bring the matter to an end. He is in Brighton--he is staying at the 'Grand.' We might go round there to-morrow morning."

"He might kick us out."

"I only hope he may try. I would give him such a hammering. But you need not be afraid of that. It wouldn't do to have Maggie's name mentioned in connection with a vulgar brawl--people are not too charitable. My idea is that this business should be conducted in the quietest and most gentlemanly manner possible."

"I think I had better speak to father first."

"No necessity; he will be only too glad to get rid of the penniless brute. Don't you think so, Mrs. Brookes?"

"I do."

They then spoke of other things--of the shop, the profit they had made on tomatoes, and the losses that had resulted from over-stocking themselves with flour. At last a loud snore brought the conversation to a full stop, and Frank hurriedly bade them good-night.

"Cissy will let you out," said Willy, with a sigh of relief.

The little girl had pulled on her stockings and tied a petticoat round her waist. "So you are going to be married."

"O Cissy, you have been listening!"

"Is she very nice? She must be very nice for you to marry her. I should like to marry you."

"Would you, Cissy, and why?"

"Oh, because you are so very handsome. But you will come and see us all the same, and let me sit on your knee?"

"Of course I will, Cissy, and now good-night."

Next morning Willy declared himself ready to go and see Mr. Charles Stracey, and to tell him that he was not to call any more at the Manor House, or speak to Miss Brookes if he should happen to meet her. Frank wondered if this decision was owing to Mrs. Brookes's influence.

"I slept last night at the 'Grand' It seemed odd sleeping in the same house--perhaps within a few doors of him. If you only knew how I love her, if I could only tell you, you would pity me. You ought to know what I feel--the anxiety, the heart-ache. I know you have gone through it all."

"Yes, I think I know what it is," Willy replied thoughtfully.

"Mr. Stracey is staying here?"

"Will you enquire at the office, sir?"

While the books were being searched the young men consulted together. Frank said: "Send up your card, and say you will be glad to speak to him on a matter of importance. Of course he will see you, but before you speak about Maggie you must apologise for my presence; you must say that I am a very particular friend, and that you thought it better that the interview should take place in the presence of a witness."

"I wish it were all over. I wouldn't do what I am doing for any one else, I can tell you, Frank."

"Mr. Stracey is in the hotel, sir."

"Will you give him my card, and say I should be glad to speak to him on a matter of importance?"

"Very good, sir."

(In an undertone to Frank), "Was that right?"

"Quite right."

"Oh, one thing I had forgotten to ask you--am I to shake hands with him?"

"You mean if he offers you his hand?"

"Yes."

"It is impossible to settle everything beforehand. One must act according as the occasion requires."

"That's all very well for you, but I am a slow man, and am lost if I don't arrange beforehand."

"Pretend not to see his hand, and apologise for my presence; he will then see that we mean business."

"The waiting is the worst part."

"Will you walk this way, sir?" said the page boy. "Mr. Stracey is not out of bed yet, but he said if you wouldn't mind, sir."

They shrank from their enterprise instinctively, but the door was thrown open, and they saw a bath, and a sponge, and a towel, and Mr. Stracey lying on his back reading _The Sporting Times_. He extended a long brawny arm. The strength of the arm fixed itself on Willy's mind, and he doubted if he had not better take the proffered hand.

"I brought my friend Mr. Escott with me, for I thought a witness--I mean, that this interview should be conducted in the presence of a third party."

At this speech Charlie opened his eyes and dropped his paper. Willy leaned over the rail of the bed; Frank looked into the bath, but remembering himself suddenly, he examined the chest of drawers.

"I have come to speak to you about my sister."

Charlie changed countenance, and both men noticed the change.

"I mean to say I have come to tell you that you must discontinue your visits to the Manor House, and I must beg of you not to address my sisters should you meet them."

"May I ask if you are your father's representative, if you speak with his authority?"

"I do not. I--"

"Then I should like to know on what authority you forbid me a house that doesn't belong to you, and I should like to know, if your father doesn't disapprove of my knowing your sisters, why you should? I shall speak to Miss Brookes as long as she cares to speak to me. The very idea of a man like you coming here to bully me! You have got my answer."

"If, after this warning," said Frank, who, seeing that things were going against them, thought he had better interfere, "you speak to Miss Brookes, you will do so at your peril."

"Peril! What do you mean?"

"I mean that you must be prepared to take the consequences."

"Who are you? I should like to know what you have to do in this matter?"

"I speak as Miss Brookes's future husband."

"Future husband be damned! She'll never marry you," said Charlie, springing out of bed.

Frank threw himself on his guard, and they would have struck each other if Willy had not cried out: "Frank, remember you promised me there must be no scandal."

"I had almost forgotten. For Miss Brookes's sake, I refrain. Do you also, for her sake, cease to provoke me."

Charlie hesitated for a moment, then rushing to the door, he said: "I, too, for Miss Brookes's sake, refrain, and I give you three seconds to clear out."

In attempting to carry out the injunction Willy nearly fell in the bath. Frank had to bite his lip to avoid a smile, and he stalked out of the room assuming his most arrogant air.

"I think, on the whole, we got the best of it," he said as they went down stairs.

"Do you? He turned us out of his room!"

"That's the worst of tackling a man in his own room--if he tells you to go, and you don't go, he can ring for the servants."

"I was as nearly as possible going into the bath."

"Yes, a touch more and down you'd have gone." Frank laughed, and Willy laughed, "and that fellow in his nightshirt fishing you out!"

"Oh, don't, don't--"

Frank asked Willy to lunch with him at Mutton's, and he ordered a bottle of champagne in honour of the day.

"I say, just fancy pulling you out of the bath, and wiping you with a towel. I can see you dripping!"

"Don't set me off again. Let me enjoy my cutlets."

"By Jove! there's something I hadn't thought of."

"What's that?"

"We must be off. We must tell Maggie what has happened before he has time to communicate with her. What is the next train to Southwick?"

"There's one at half-past one."

"It was after twelve when we saw him, he won't have time to catch that. We must be off. Waiter, the bill, and be quick. Look sharp, Willy, finish the bottle, pity to waste it."

"What a nuisance women are, to be sure. Just as I was enjoying my cutlet! I can't walk fast in this weather, I should make myself ill."

"We must take a cab."

"What a fellow you are, you never think of the expense. I don't know where I should be if I were as reckless as you are."

"Supposing he were at the station. It would be rather a sell if we went down by the same train! What should we do? He would surely never attempt to force his way in!"

"I don't think he would attempt that. If he did, we should have to send for the police."

The young men strove to decide how the news should be broken to Maggie. But they had arranged nothing before they arrived at Southwick, and Frank stopped Willy time after time by the footpath, until at last in despair the latter said: "We must make haste; there's another train in twenty minutes."

"By Jove! I had not thought of that; we must get on. Well, then, it is all arranged. You must tell her that you thought it your duty. Put it all down to duty, and it was your duty to do what you did--putting entirely out of the question the service you did me."

"I can tell you what, Frank, I am very sorry I ever meddled in the matter. Had I known the vexation and annoyance it would have caused--and mark my words, and see if they don't come true, we are only commencing the annoyances that the affair will cause us. Ah, had I only foreseen! What a fool I was; I ought to have known better; I have had nothing but bad luck all my life. It is perfectly wonderful the bad luck I have had; no matter what I did, nothing seemed to go right. I dare say if you had gone to see that fellow without me it would have turned out differently. But I don't see how I am to tell my sister point blank that I have forbidden him the house. What will she say? She may fly at me. Women have queer tempers, particularly when you interfere with their young men. My sisters have the very worst of tempers; you don't know them as I do. Fortunately it is not Sally. I assure you I wouldn't face Sally with such news for all the money you could give me."

"I am very sorry, old chap, but we must now go through it. You must forbid her to communicate with him."

"She won't heed what I say. It will only excite her. She will fly at me, and call me names, and burst into tears. I should not be surprised if she went off her head--she has been very strange once before. I don't mean to say she was ever wrong in her head, but she is a nervous, excitable girl--most excitable; my sisters are the most excitable girls I have ever known."

It was surprisingly soon over. Willy had not spoken a dozen words, when he was interrupted.

"You mean to say you have been to call on him?"

"Yes; and we told him he was never to speak to you again."


Frank expected her eyes to flash fire, but he only noticed a slight change in her face, a movement of the muscles of the lower jaw.

"Then I will speak to neither of you again!" and she walked out of the room, and in dismay they listened to her going upstairs.

"She didn't fly at me," said Willy; and, looking a little terrified, he stroked his moustache softly. "I told you she would give no heed to what we said; nor do I see how we can prevent her seeing that fellow if she chooses. He cannot come into the house, it is true, but she can go out when she pleases."

"We must follow her."

Conscious of defeat, Willy desired compromise. He could not be induced to take a share of watching and following which Frank declared essential; and, dreading an encounter with Stracey, whose brawny arm it was impossible to forget, he shut himself up in the shop, and devoted himself to drawing up a most elaborate balance-sheet, showing how he would stand if he were obliged to close the business to-morrow, whereas Frank loitered about the roads, till Mrs. Horlock came along with her dogs, and engaged him in conversation; and no matter at what corner he stationed himself, he found he was not free from observation. A few days after he could not bring himself to return to his post, and contented himself with looking out of his window, and taking an occasional stroll by the embankment, when he saw a train signalled.

A great weight seemed lifted from his shoulder the day he heard that his rival's holiday had come to an end, and that he had been forced to return to his counting-house in London. True it is that Mr. Brookes had in a certain measure approved of Willy's action in forbidding young Stracey the Manor House, and therefore of his, Frank Escott's, suit, but neither of these gains compensated him for the crowning loss of not being able to see his beloved, for although the Manor House was still theoretically open to him, practically it was closed. The sisters, although at variance on all subjects, had united in condemning him and Willy, and during one dinner, the misery of which he declared he could never forget, they had sat whispering together, refusing to address him either by look or word. Willy took all this calmly. It is an ill wind that blows no good, and the silence enabled him to thoroughly masticate his food. Mr. Brookes wept a little and laughed a little, and reminded them of the oblivion that awaited all their little quarrels.

All this, like much else in life, was ridiculous enough; but because we are ridiculous, it does not follow that we do not suffer, and Frank suffered. He was five-and-twenty, and light love had him fairly by the throat; he winced, and he cried out, but very soon his dignity gave way, and he craved forgiveness. But Maggie passed without heeding him. For more than a week she resisted all his appeals, and it was not until she saw that she was taking the neighbourhood into her confidence, and to feel that if she did not relent a little he might leave Southwick, and not return, she answered him with a monosyllable. With what bliss did he hear that first "no," and how passionately he pleaded for a few words; it did not seem to matter what they were, so long as he heard her speak one whole sentence to him. Feeling her power, she was shy of yielding, and with every concession she drew him further into the meshes of love. He dined now nearly every day at the Manor House, and he spent an hour, sometimes two, with her in the morning or afternoon; he followed her from greenhouse to greenhouse, but all his efforts were in vain, and he failed not only to obtain her promise to marry him, but even a renewal of the feeble and partial hopes which she had given him that night on the beach. He prayed, he wept, he implored pity, he openly spoke of suicide, and he hinted at murder. But Maggie passed him, pushing him out of the way with the watering-pot, threatening to water him too, until one day he drew a revolver. She screamed, and the revolver was put away, but on the next occasion a stiletto that he had brought from Italy was produced, and with a great deal of earnestness life was declared to be a miserable thing. It was absurd, no doubt, but at the same time it was not a little pathetic; he was so good-looking, and so sincere. Maggie put down the watering-pot, and she would probably have allowed him to take her hand and kiss her, if he had not spoken roughly about Charlie, and called her conduct into question. So she told him she would not speak to him again, and she continued watering the flowers in silence. Amid vague remembrances of murders she had read of, Frank's words and behaviour remained present in her mind, and that evening when Willy, who rarely took the trouble to speak, much less to advise his sisters, told her that she might never get such a chance again, she said: "I am not going to marry a madman to please your vanity."

"Marry a madman! What do you mean?"

"Well, I call a man that who comes regularly to see a girl with a revolver in one pocket and a stiletto in the other, and threatens to leave himself wallowing in a pool of blood at her feet--"

"You mean to say he does that? You are clearly determined to drive the poor fellow out of his mind with your infernal coquetry. Well, women are the most troublesome, and I believe in many cases, the wickedest creatures on the face of God's earth."

"You shut up. Men who don't get on with women always abuse them; you are soured since Miss ----, the actress, jilted you."

"If you ever dare mention that subject, I will never speak to you again. You know I don't break my word."

"Why do you interfere in my affairs? You don't think of me when you go down to browbeat Charlie Stracey; you don't think of what would have been said of me had Frank hit him, and it had all come out in the papers." Maggie said no more; she saw she had gone too far. Willy sat puffing at his pipe; but when her father spoke of a certain investment that had not turned out as well as he had anticipated, he joined in the conversation, and she hoped her cruelty was forgotten.



