CHAPTER XVIII. A NEW WORLD


Hotchkiss jotted down the bits of telegram and rose.

“Well,” he said, “we’ve done something. We’ve found where the murderer left the train, we know what day he went to Baltimore, and, most important of all, we have a motive for the crime.”

“It seems the irony of fate,” said McKnight, getting up, “that a man should kill another man for certain papers he is supposed to be carrying, find he hasn’t got them after all, decide to throw suspicion on another man by changing berths and getting out, bag and baggage, and then, by the merest fluke of chance, take with him, in the valise he changed for his own, the very notes he was after. It was a bit of luck for him.”

“Then why,” put in Hotchkiss doubtfully, “why did he collapse when he heard of the wreck? And what about the telephone message the station agent sent? You remember they tried to countermand it, and with some excitement.”

“We will ask him those questions when we get him,” McKnight said. We were on the unrailed front porch by that time, and Hotchkiss had put away his notebook. The mother of the twins followed us to the steps.

“Dear me,” she exclaimed volubly, “and to think I was forgetting to tell you! I put the young man to bed with a spice poultice on his ankle: my mother always was a firm believer in spice poultices. It’s wonderful what they will do in croup! And then I took the children and went down to see the wreck. It was Sunday, and the mister had gone to church; hasn’t missed a day since he took the pledge nine years ago. And on the way I met two people, a man and a woman. They looked half dead, so I sent them right here for breakfast and some soap and water. I always say soap is better than liquor after a shock.”

Hotchkiss was listening absently: McKnight was whistling under his breath, staring down across the field to where a break in the woods showed a half dozen telegraph poles, the line of the railroad.

“It must have been twelve o’clock when we got back; I wanted the children to see everything, because it isn’t likely they’ll ever see another wreck like that. Rows of—”

“About twelve o’clock,” I broke in, “and what then?”

“The young man up-stairs was awake,” she went on, “and hammering at his door like all possessed. And it was locked on the outside!” She paused to enjoy her sensation.

“I would like to see that lock,” Hotchkiss said promptly, but for some reason the woman demurred.

“I will bring the key down,” she said and disappeared. When she returned she held out an ordinary door key of the cheapest variety.

“We had to break the lock,” she volunteered, “and the key didn’t turn up for two days. Then one of the twins found the turkey gobbler trying to swallow it. It has been washed since,” she hastened to assure Hotchkiss, who showed an inclination to drop it.

“You don’t think he locked the door himself and threw the key out of the window?” the little man asked.

“The windows are covered with mosquito netting, nailed on. The mister blamed it on the children, and it might have been Obadiah. He’s the quiet kind, and you never know what he’s about.”

“He’s about to strangle, isn’t he,” McKnight remarked lazily, “or is that Obadiah?”

Mrs. Carter picked the boy up and inverted him, talking amiably all the time. “He’s always doing it,” she said, giving him a shake. “Whenever we miss anything we look to see if Obadiah’s black in the face.” She gave him another shake, and the quarter I had given him shot out as if blown from a gun. Then we prepared to go back to the station.

From where I stood I could look into the cheery farm kitchen, where Alison West and I had eaten our _al fresco_ breakfast. I looked at the table with mixed emotions, and then, gradually, the meaning of something on it penetrated my mind. Still in its papers, evidently just opened, was a hat box, and protruding over the edge of the box was a streamer of vivid green ribbon.

On the plea that I wished to ask Mrs. Carter a few more questions, I let the others go on. I watched them down the flagstone walk; saw McKnight stop and examine the gate-posts and saw, too, the quick glance he threw back at the house. Then I turned to Mrs. Carter.

“I would like to speak to the young lady up-stairs,” I said.

She threw up her hands with a quick gesture of surrender. “I’ve done all I could,” she exclaimed. “She won’t like it very well, but—she’s in the room over the parlor.”

I went eagerly up the ladder-like stairs, to the rag-carpeted hall. Two doors were open, showing interiors of four poster beds and high bureaus. The door of the room over the parlor was almost closed. I hesitated in the hallway: after all, what right had I to intrude on her? But she settled my difficulty by throwing open the door and facing me.

“I—I beg your pardon, Miss West,” I stammered. “It has just occurred to me that I am unpardonably rude. I saw the hat down-stairs and I—I guessed—”

“The hat!” she said. “I might have known. Does Richey know I am here?”

“I don’t think so.” I turned to go down the stairs again. Then I halted. “The fact is,” I said, in an attempt at justification, “I’m in rather a mess these days, and I’m apt to do irresponsible things. It is not impossible that I shall be arrested, in a day or so, for the murder of Simon Harrington.”

She drew her breath in sharply. “Murder!” she echoed. “Then they have found you after all!”

“I don’t regard it as anything more than—er—inconvenient,” I lied. “They can’t convict me, you know. Almost all the witnesses are dead.”

She was not deceived for a moment. She came over to me and stood, both hands on the rail of the stair. “I know just how grave it is,” she said quietly. “My grandfather will not leave one stone unturned, and he can be terrible—terrible. But”—she looked directly into my eyes as I stood below her on the stairs—“the time may come—soon—when I can help you. I’m afraid I shall not want to; I’m a dreadful coward, Mr. Blakeley. But—I will.” She tried to smile.

“I wish you would let _me_ help _you_,” I said unsteadily. “Let us make it a bargain: each help the other!”

The girl shook her head with a sad little smile. “I am only as unhappy as I deserve to be,” she said. And when I protested and took a step toward her she retreated, with her hands out before her.

“Why don’t you ask me all the questions you are thinking?” she demanded, with a catch in her voice. “Oh, I know them. Or are you afraid to ask?”

I looked at her, at the lines around her eyes, at the drawn look about her mouth. Then I held out my hand. “Afraid!” I said, as she gave me hers. “There is nothing in God’s green earth I am afraid of, save of trouble for you. To ask questions would be to imply a lack of faith. I ask you nothing. Some day, perhaps, you will come to me yourself and let me help you.”

The next moment I was out in the golden sunshine: the birds were singing carols of joy: I walked dizzily through rainbow-colored clouds, past the twins, cherubs now, swinging on the gate. It was a new world into which I stepped from the Carter farm-house that morning, for—I had kissed her!