-TWO

_BACKSIGHT_


One of the most remarkable features of Gutzon Borglum’s quarrel with Georgia seems to be Georgia’s unawareness of it. The sculptor left Stone Mountain ahead of the constables on February 25, 1925. And he sat for a long time in Raleigh aware that a large group of worthy patriots was demanding that he be extradited to stand trial in the municipal court for breaking up a worthless lot of plaster. Then in March 1926 he received a remarkable call. The state of Georgia, which had him roughly classified as a fugitive from justice, conferred on him the signal honor of asking him to make a statue of one of her most distinguished sons, Alexander H. Stephens, vice-president of the Confederacy. The statue was to find permanent place in Statuary Hall of the Capitol Building at Washington, D. C.

Gutzon carried on conversations about this piece of work by mail and carved the figure in San Antonio, Texas. It was a striking portrait, fine, strongly intellectual features, lighted by an inner serenity and gentleness. It was a seated figure, for Stephens could not stand. And the hands, resting on the arms of his chair, were modeled to show great firmness of character. Hugo Villa, who had followed the sculptor to Texas, helped carve the statue, slightly oversize, in Georgian marble.

The unveiling in Washington in 1927 was a gala affair. A special trainload of Georgians had come to the capital with the governor of the state in the lead. The National Guard of Georgia, brilliantly uniformed, was on hand to lend color.

Most of these people were from Atlanta. Some were even members of the Stone Mountain executive committee. All seemed to ignore the tragic happenings of only two years before. It must be noted, however, that Gutzon was as good at that as they were. He was calm, pleasantly aloof and unconcerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1928 the time set for the finishing of the central group on Stone Mountain expired with only Lee’s head and part of his horse completed. An attempt was made by the donors to reclaim the property. They said that the work on Stone Mountain was at a standstill and that the operating Association was insolvent.

Sam Venable circulated an open letter in which he charged that he had added together all the sums spent by the Association on bank loans, etc., and had reached the stupendous figure of $1,421,665 which, he said, it had cost Gutzon’s successor to complete his model and change the bust of Lee. He added this comment:

     Furthermore, Mr. Borglum’s head of Lee everybody recognized. His      successor’s head of Lee, nobody recognizes. The nose is crooked.      The left arm is withered and paralyzed. The hilt of the sword is      gone and the stirrup of the saddle is broken off. The money is all      gone and the carving of Lee, in my opinion and the opinion of      hundreds of others, is a mutilated imperfection that cannot be      rectified.

The Association was in debt to the Founders’ Roll for the use of $260,800 paid for tablets, and to the Children’s Founders’ Roll for $35,019.91. Suits were being brought by contributors to the first of these funds. G. F. Willis succeeded Hollins Randolph as president. The Association begged for an extension of time, and the Venable family agreed to allow work to proceed until May 1931. However, nothing was done on the mountain during that period.

In 1930 the Atlanta Chamber of Commerce, under the leadership of Park Committee Chairman L. Lawrence McCord, got interested in finishing the monument. Mayor-elect James L. Key, largely celebrated for his huge Sunday School Bible Class, sent a telegram to Gutzon who was then in the Black Hills. He wanted to have Mr. Borglum come to Atlanta as his guest, he said, for the purpose of conference on Stone Mountain Memorial. The telegram was sent in August 1930. It might be mentioned that on July 4 of that year the head of Washington had been unveiled on Mount Rushmore with a great deal of publicity.

The sculptor arrived in Atlanta on the first of September and was given a rousing welcome and reception by a capacity house at the Fox theater. It was the first chance public opinion had had to express itself, and the result was gratifying to a man who had had to suffer in silence for five years. He mentioned that if he had to do it over again, he would make the Stone Mountain figures twice the size. He had learned something of mountain carving. The crowd cheered him enthusiastically, and he came home. But little came of it.

In 1931 McCord got a bill through the Georgia state legislature, giving the state right of eminent domain to take over Stone Mountain and adjacent property for a park. On this basis talks went on for years and years.

In 1933 Sam Venable with Mrs. Frank Mason, to whom he gave his share of Stone Mountain, presented a deed to Mayor Key for the portion of the cliff required for carving, and an attempt was made to get W.P.A. funds to finance the undertaking. There was a vast amount of correspondence without result. In 1936 the governor made an investigation of possibilities. In 1937 W. R. Ulrich of the Atlanta Chamber of Commerce met Borglum in Washington and they had a friendly conference.

In the winter of 1939-1940 there was another revival of interest, and once more Gutzon was called to Atlanta. The hotel men of Atlanta had suddenly become aware that tourists coming to see Mount Rushmore were dumping large amounts of cash into South Dakota. They were wondering why they had never foreseen this golden reward, and they could see that they needed Gutzon’s help. They were willing to put up enough money to pay for the labor week by week if he would donate his time and use his influence to get credit with the machinery and powder companies.

Gutzon was jubilant. Dr. Ashby Jones, popular clergyman, and Preston Arkright, president of the Georgia Power Company, gave him their blessing. Success seemed so near that the sculptor wrote a letter to John Kaufman, who had succeeded Cliff Davis as stand-by on Stone Mountain, to be ready for starting work next Monday, to lay out a program for a full week. And then that too joined the futile history of the mountain. The other half-owners of the mountain wanted a million dollars which they insisted must be paid to them before work could be resumed. So this chance failed. The matter of the carving on Stone Mountain remained unchanged a year later when the sculptor suddenly died.

Despite the course of ill luck, bickering and unexplained hatred that has accompanied it, the dream of Atlanta for a Confederate memorial--or the dream of Atlanta hotel men for a popular tourist attraction--is still showing signs of life. The state of Georgia has appropriated funds for the purchase of Stone Mountain and the establishment of a park at its base. An Atlanta sculptor has been appointed to take charge of any carving that may be done on the tremendous uplift of granite. The wording of the commission is a bit indefinite as, after all popular experience with the memorial, it should be. But, somehow, the emergence of the Confederate armies from the rock seems a bit nearer than it did yesterday.

There is no recognizable trace today of Gutzon Borglum’s magnificent head of Lee, or of anything else identifiable with the vision of Helen Plane. There is a disfiguring scar, the remnant of a head, part of a horse. But no matter. Some starry-eyed sculptor, somewhere, is figuring on a new supply of dynamite and drills, and some epochal work--it will start any day now, you may hear--to recover Borglum’s unfortunate plan. The mark of his hand is dim, perhaps, but it is still to be found there on the rock--the reminder of what was certainly a noble and, as it turns out, continuous experiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Borglum family moved to Texas from North Carolina in 1925 because the Trail Drivers’ Association wanted a monument and because the Stone Mountain Confederate Memorial Association had definitely set its trail toward nothing. Texas would have been a remarkable spot for them in any case, and it was one place in the universe that they knew little about.

The romantic history of the state--its gracious women, tall men, Spanish warriors and grandees, American pioneers and land seekers, its Alamo, its victorious revolution, its statehood, Indians, rangers, ranchmen, cowboys, trail drivers--all appealed to Gutzon like a journey back to boyhood when he received the invitation of the Trail Drivers’ Association to their conference in 1925. These men, now grown old, wanted a memorial. They wanted to perpetuate the heroes of an epoch when cowboys braved heat and cold, drought and flood, hostile Indians and rustlers, as they drove herds of longhorns northward across hundreds of miles of continent to Kansas or Montana.

It was disappointing to some of the newcomers to discover that San Antonio was a highly civilized city with a cultural history antedating the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers. As for their equipment, Mrs. Borglum’s sidesaddle stood for years in a saddle-shop window as an eye-opening evidence of an effete custom.

A studio was improvised in a shed previously used to house floats before the annual “Battle of Flowers” parade. There, while making the first model for the Trail Drivers’ monument, Gutzon was initiated into the lore of the trail. Old cowmen came in





numbers and sat at ease as they yarned about how cattle behaved; how cowboys talked, rode, ate and slept; how they dressed by putting their big hats on; how they soothed the bedded herd by singing a ballad of uncounted verses. When the time came for the sculptor to make scenes in bas-relief around the base of the monument talk rose to feverish heat over such moot questions as whether thirsty cattle lift their tails when they scent water, or whether cowboys squat on their heels around a campfire at night.

Gutzon tracked down the few remaining longhorn cattle in the state and took time to witness driving, riding, roping--all the details of the cattle business as exposed in numerous rodeos. A cowboy known as “Red” posed for one of the chief figures in the group. And when a question arose as to who should be pictured in the other, there was rivalry over the claims of George Saunders, president of the association, and another old cowman, Tom Russell, recently deceased. Russell’s widow was a prime mover in the memorial project, but she wasn’t looking for a personal monument. She and her committee worked tirelessly to raise money for this tribute to the unsung heroism of their menfolk.

As the model was finally developed to their satisfaction it showed two riders, one pointing with outstretched arm to indicate where water would be found, while behind them were three longhorn steers, their heads and tails raised as they scented the distant river. To cast that group in bronze, full size, called for more money than the women could raise at a time when drought and low prices for beef put the cattle business in a decline. Even before the clay model was completed, messages came from Atlanta warning the Trail Drivers to have nothing to do with Borglum. The women seemed unconcerned. When the model was exhibited in other cities there came lively bidding for its location. Mr. Goodnight, a famous old ranchman, offered to pay for the casting on condition that the monument be placed in Abilene, but the San Antonio Chamber of Commerce was determined to keep the work where the idea originated. Only enough money for a bronze about one-fourth life size could be raised, and the memorial was permanently placed outside Trail Drivers Hall, especially built for the purpose in Breckenridge Park. This was a great disappointment to the sculptor who had planned for an enlarged group more than forty feet long to stand under the open sky in front of San Antonio’s auditorium.

As long as there was any hope of completing his work at Stone Mountain, a hope that died hard, the sculptor wanted to remain in the South, where his chief need was a roomy studio. He secured lease of space in a machine shop near the railroad tracks to complete the model of the Trail Drivers’ memorial, and then began to scout around San Antonio for a more permanent location. He found it eventually in an old stone building on the edge of Breckenridge Park which had been abandoned by the local water company.

The genial park commissioner allowed him to remodel it. A new roof was built with its big skylight, an ell added, windows and doorways completely rebuilt and the interior decorated. When finished it was a delightful place for work or play, half hidden by pecan trees that shaded it from the Southern sun, with the sound of running water beneath. Here several new sculptural works were modeled, but only one was destined to stand in Texas. When it came about that Mount Rushmore demanded all his time the sculptor gave this San Antonio studio to the Witte Museum in the same park. Now known as the Borglum Memorial Studio, it is used for art classes and as a meeting place for art students.

In this city the sculptor became deeply involved in several projects promoted mostly by women, who often took the lead in civic improvements. There were women’s clubs all over the state which invited the sculptor to tell his ideas on the art and beautification of one’s surroundings. The Conservation Society of San Antonio interested him in their pet project of beautifying the banks of the San Antonio River, a lazy little stream that threaded its way through the city. Real-estate interests wanted to fill up the stream and use the space for more buildings, but the women wouldn’t hear of it. In this the sculptor joined heartily, but his ideas conflicted with theirs when it came to restoration of old Spanish ruins.

From his experience in preserving the California missions the sculptor was keenly interested in these San Antonio ruins, one of which, the San Jose Mission, is especially beautiful. A copy of its rose window was sent to the Chicago World’s Fair in 1933.

Before he arrived, its belfry tower had collapsed. Mrs. J. P. Drought, one of the most civic-minded leaders San Antonio ever had, had at her own expense hired workmen to collect the stones and wood blocks for the stairs and return them to their original places. The belfry stairs, triangular blocks of wood that unknown hands had carved out of big trees, had been carried away as relics by Mexican families, and the same Mrs. Drought had searched them out, one by one, and brought them back to the mission as a real work of restoration. Meanwhile the Conservation Society engaged a local architect to restore parts of the old church and a granary which had almost disappeared.

Seeing what was going on and knowing that such a restoration would only destroy the original character of the mission, Gutzon wrote an article in protest against what seemed to him vandalism, but never published it because he did not want to hurt the feelings of a friend who was most active in the undertaking. Instead, he sent her the typed article with this friendly warning: “I alone am honest enough to tell you that you cannot restore the lost lines of a great poem, the lost notes of a great opera, the lost parts of a great building, the lost parts of a great painting.”

And there were other projects. There were two large musical societies in the city, both run by women, with considerable rivalry between them. The leader of one club came to the sculptor begging his help in building an open-air theater in an old quarry in Breckenridge Park where she could have performances by her Civic Opera Company. “We have no money to pay an architect,” she said. “Won’t you design us a theater, just for the love of art and music?”

The project interested the sculptor and he went out to the quarry to study its possibilities. Mrs. Borglum vividly remembers one moonlight night when she and Gutzon were accompanied by Mrs. Drought and her guest, a professor from Dublin, Ireland, a man well acquainted with the new Irish Theater in Dublin, who had come to Texas on a lecture tour. He bubbled over with enthusiasm when Gutzon pointed out a little knoll overlooking the quarry which he had already selected as a stage. On each side of this he planned a group of columns with dressing rooms behind. For the curtain he designed something new--a barrage of water jets which could be turned on or off at will. When the curtain was down, colored lights would play on the water, creating an eerie effect and concealing the stage from the audience. All details were so carefully worked out that the only expense to the city would be for material and labor, with no fee for the designer, Gutzon, who would act also as superintendent of the work. To make sure that his architectural plans were correct, he summoned at his own expense Mr. Kimball, who had been president of the National Institute of Architects. This helpful friend not only made blueprints and drew up specifications but made a pretty water-color sketch to show how the theater would look when finished.

Naturally the members of the Civic Opera and the San Antonio Woman’s Club were delighted. In a mass they went to the City Hall when the plan was submitted to the council. Without a dissenting vote a resolution was passed accepting the open-air theater as the sculptor had planned it.

And that, one grieves to record, was the end of another Gutzon Borglum dream. After a long delay a conventional design by a local architect was “unanimously approved” by the same city fathers. The theater was built at city expense. And the lady who had begged the sculptor to design the theater because she had no money to pay an architect told him that the wife of one of her leading singers was the local architect’s sister. The lady accepted the tenor’s brother-in-law because it made her tenor happy. “And, dear Mr. Borglum, what else could I do?” wailed the lady.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gutzon was much taken with the appearance of Corpus Christi, Texas; however, he felt the shore line was unsightly. So he hired an aviator to take pictures of the town showing the residential portion on a plateau high above the gulf and the crowded business district along the shore line. He took the mayor and some other citizens on a motor trip to Galveston and along the Gulf Coast to Florida to see how other cities had dealt with similar water-front problems.

He built a plaster model of Corpus Christi with a fine new--and artistic--concrete promenade along the sea front, with steps down to the water’s edge, and exhibited it in the rooms of the Chamber of Commerce. He designed approaches for a new bridge to replace the old drawbridge that frequently tied up traffic for half an hour at a time. And he got a Mr. Harrington of Kansas City, a reputable bridge builder, to design a bridge. The cost of this improvement, he felt, would speedily be paid by toll collected from the passing cars.

Everybody was interested in Borglum’s great enterprise. A loan project was placed before the R.F.C., which turned it over to the W.P.A., which started everything all over again. In the end the whole business got into the hands of the state W.P.A. at Fort Worth, and the water-front-bridge development was changed to a sewer project. Probably the sewer was needed and anyhow it had not been proposed by a stranger.

Texas, the sculptor learned, was a place where big things were done bigly; but, nevertheless, in the accustomed fashion.